《《圣经》旧约》txt下载|在线阅读e书联盟TXT电子书下载=>网址http://t.book118.com/,请使用IE7或IE8浏览本页，谢谢!

《圣经》旧约 



旧约-- 创世记(Genesis) -- 第1 章( 本篇共有50 章)    　


1:1    起初神创造天地。
In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth.

1:2    地是空虚混沌。渊面黑暗。神的灵运行在水面上。
And the earth was without form, and void; and darkness was upon the face of the deep. And the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters.

1:3    神说，要有光，就有了光。
And God said, Let there be light: and there was light.

1:4    神看光是好的，就把光暗分开了。
And God saw the light, that it was good: and God divided the light from the darkness.

1:5    神称光为昼，称暗为夜。有晚上，有早晨，这是头一日。
And God called the light Day, and the darkness he called Night. And the evening and the morning were the first day.

1:6    神说，诸水之间要有空气，将水分为上下。
And God said, Let there be a firmament in the midst of the waters, and let it divide the waters from the waters.

1:7    神就造出空气，将空气以下的水，空气以上的水分开了。事就这样成了。
And God made the firmament, and divided the waters which were under the firmament from the waters which were above the firmament: and it was so.

1:8    神称空气为天。有晚上，有早晨，是第二日。
And God called the firmament Heaven. And the evening and the morning were the second day.

1:9    神说，天下的水要聚在一处，使旱地露出来。事就这样成了。
And God said, Let the waters under the heaven be gathered together unto one place, and let the dry land appear: and it was so.

1:10    神称旱地为地，称水的聚处为海。神看是好的。
And God called the dry land Earth; and the gathering together of the waters called he Seas: and God saw that it was good.

1:11    神说，地要发生青草，和结种子的菜蔬，并结果子的树木，各从其类，果子都包着核。事就这样成了。
And God said, Let the earth bring forth grass, the herb yielding seed, and the fruit tree yielding fruit after his kind, whose seed is in itself, upon the earth: and it was so.

1:12    于是地发生了青草，和结种子的菜蔬，各从其类，并结果子的树木，各从其类，果子都包着核。神看着是好的。
And the earth brought forth grass, and herb yielding seed after his kind, and the tree yielding fruit, whose seed was in itself, after his kind: and God saw that it was good.

1:13    有晚上，有早晨，是第三日。
And the evening and the morning were the third day.

1:14    神说，天上要有光体，可以分昼夜，作记号，定节令，日子，年岁。
And God said, Let there be lights in the firmament of the heaven to divide the day from the night; and let them be for signs, and for seasons, and for days, and years:

1:15    并要发光在天空，普照在地上。事就这样成了。
And let them be for lights in the firmament of the heaven to give light upon the earth: and it was so.

1:16    于是神造了两个大光，大的管昼，小的管夜。又造众星。
And God made two great lights; the greater light to rule the day, and the lesser light to rule the night: he made the stars also.

1:17    就把这些光摆列在天空，普照在地上。
And God set them in the firmament of the heaven to give light upon the earth,

1:18    管理昼夜，分别明暗。神看着是好的。
And to rule over the day and over the night, and to divide the light from the darkness: and God saw that it was good.

1:19    有晚上，有早晨，是第四日。
And the evening and the morning were the fourth day.

1:20    神说，水要多多滋生有生命的物，要有雀鸟飞在地面以上，天空之中。
And God said, Let the waters bring forth abundantly the moving creature that hath life, and fowl that may fly above the earth in the open firmament of heaven.

1:21    神就造出大鱼和水中所滋生各样有生命的动物，各从其类。又造出各样飞鸟，各从其类。神看着是好的。
And God created great whales, and every living creature that moveth, which the waters brought forth abundantly, after their kind, and every winged fowl after his kind: and God saw that it was good.

1:22    神就赐福给这一切，说，滋生繁多，充满海中的水。雀鸟也要多生在地上。
And God blessed them, saying, Be fruitful, and multiply, and fill the waters in the seas, and let fowl multiply in the earth.

1:23    有晚上，有早晨，是第五日。
And the evening and the morning were the fifth day.

1:24    神说，地要生出活物来，各从其类。牲畜，昆虫，野兽，各从其类。事就这样成了。
And God said, Let the earth bring forth the living creature after his kind, cattle, and creeping thing, and beast of the earth after his kind: and it was so.

1:25    于是神造出野兽，各从其类。牲畜，各从其类。地上一切昆虫，各从其类。神看着是好的。
And God made the beast of the earth after his kind, and cattle after their kind, and every thing that creepeth upon the earth after his kind: and God saw that it was good.

1:26    神说，我们要照着我们的形像，按着我们的样式造人，使他们管理海里的鱼，空中的鸟，地上的牲畜，和全地，并地上所爬的一切昆虫。
And God said, Let us make man in our image, after our likeness: and let them have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over the cattle, and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth.

1:27    神就照着自己的形像造人，乃是照着他的形像造男造女。
So God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him; male and female created he them.

1:28    神就赐福给他们，又对他们说，要生养众多，遍满地面，治理这地。也要管理海里的鱼，空中的鸟，和地上各样行动的活物。
And God blessed them, and God said unto them, Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it: and have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over every living thing that moveth upon the earth.

1:29    神说，看哪，我将遍地上一切结种子的菜蔬和一切树上所结有核的果子，全赐给你们作食物。
And God said, Behold, I have given you every herb bearing seed, which is upon the face of all the earth, and every tree, in the which is the fruit of a tree yielding seed; to you it shall be for meat.

1:30    至于地上的走兽和空中的飞鸟，并各样爬在地上有生命的物，我将青草赐给它们作食物。事就这样成了。
And to every beast of the earth, and to every fowl of the air, and to every thing that creepeth upon the earth, wherein there is life, I have given every green herb for meat: and it was so.

1:31    神看着一切所造的都甚好。有晚上，有早晨，是第六日。
And God saw every thing that he had made, and, behold, it was very good. And the evening and the morning were the sixth day.




旧约-- 创世记(Genesis) -- 第2 章( 本篇共有50 章)    　


2:1    天地万物都造齐了。
Thus the heavens and the earth were finished, and all the host of them.

2:2    到第七日，神造物的工已经完毕，就在第七日歇了他一切的工，安息了。
And on the seventh day God ended his work which he had made; and he rested on the seventh day from all his work which he had made.

2:3    神赐福给第七日，定为圣日，因为在这日神歇了他一切创造的工，就安息了。
And God blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it: because that in it he had rested from all his work which God created and made.

2:4    创造天地的来历，在耶和华神造天地的日子，乃是这样。
These are the generations of the heavens and of the earth when they were created, in the day that the LORD God made the earth and the heavens,

2:5    野地还没有草木，田间的菜蔬还没有长起来，因为耶和华神还没有降雨在地上，也没有人耕地。
And every plant of the field before it was in the earth, and every herb of the field before it grew: for the LORD God had not caused it to rain upon the earth, and there was not a man to till the ground.

2:6    但有雾气从地上腾，滋润遍地。
But there went up a mist from the earth, and watered the whole face of the ground.

2:7    耶和华神用地上的尘土造人，将生气吹在他鼻孔里，他就成了有灵的活人，名叫亚当。
And the LORD God formed man of the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man became a living soul.

2:8    耶和华神在东方的伊甸立了一个园子，把所造的人安置在那里。
And the LORD God planted a garden eastward in Eden; and there he put the man whom he had formed.

2:9    耶和华神使各样的树从地里长出来，可以悦人的眼目，其上的果子好作食物。园子当中又有生命树和分别善恶的树。
And out of the ground made the LORD God to grow every tree that is pleasant to the sight, and good for food; the tree of life also in the midst of the garden, and the tree of knowledge of good and evil.

2:10    有河从伊甸流出来，滋润那园子，从那里分为四道。
And a river went out of Eden to water the garden; and from thence it was parted, and became into four heads.

2:11    第一道名叫比逊，就是环绕哈腓拉全地的。在那里有金子，
The name of the first is Pison: that is it which compasseth the whole land of Havilah, where there is gold;

2:12    并且那地的金子是好的。在那里又有珍珠和红玛瑙。
And the gold of that land is good: there is bdellium and the onyx stone.

2:13    第二道河名叫基训，就是环绕古实全地的。
And the name of the second river is Gihon: the same is it that compasseth the whole land of Ethiopia.

2:14    第三道河名叫西底结，流在亚述的东边。第四道河就是幼发拉底河。
And the name of the third river is Hiddekel: that is it which goeth toward the east of Assyria. And the fourth river is Euphrates.

2:15    耶和华神将那人安置在伊甸园，使他修理看守。
And the LORD God took the man, and put him into the garden of Eden to dress it and to keep it.

2:16    耶和华神吩咐他说，园中各样树上的果子，你可以随意吃。
And the LORD God commanded the man, saying, Of every tree of the garden thou mayest freely eat:

2:17    只是分别善恶树上的果子，你不可吃，因为你吃的日子必定死。
But of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not eat of it: for in the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die.

2:18    耶和华神说，那人独居不好，我要为他造一个配偶帮助他。
And the LORD God said, It is not good that the man should be alone; I will make him an help meet for him.

2:19    耶和华神用土所造成的野地各样走兽和空中各样飞鸟都带到那人面前，看他叫什么。那人怎样叫各样的活物，那就饲它的名字。
And out of the ground the LORD God formed every beast of the field, and every fowl of the air; and brought them unto Adam to see what he would call them: and whatsoever Adam called every living creature, that was the name thereof.



2:20    那人便给一切牲畜和空中飞鸟，野地走兽都起了名。只是那人没有遇见配偶帮助他。
And Adam gave names to all cattle, and to the fowl of the air, and to every beast of the field; but for Adam there was not found an help meet for him.

2:21    耶和华神使他沉睡，他就睡了。于是取下他的一条肋骨，又把肉合起来。
And the LORD God caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam, and he slept: and he took one of his ribs, and closed up the flesh instead thereof;

2:22    耶和华神就用那人身上所取的肋骨，造成一个女人，领她到那人跟前。
And the rib, which the LORD God had taken from man, made he a woman, and brought her unto the man.

2:23    那人说，这是我骨中的骨，肉中的肉，可以称她为女人，因为她是从男人身上取出来的。
And Adam said, This is now bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh: she shall be called Woman, because she was taken out of Man.

2:24    因此，人要离开父母与妻子连合，二人成为一体。
Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall cleave unto his wife: and they shall be one flesh.

2:25    当时夫妻二人赤身露体，并不羞耻。
And they were both naked, the man and his wife, and were not ashamed.




旧约-- 创世记(Genesis) -- 第3 章( 本篇共有50 章)    　


3:1    耶和华神所造的，惟有蛇比田野一切的活物更狡猾。蛇对女人说，神岂是真说，不许你们吃园中所有树上的果子吗。
Now the serpent was more subtil than any beast of the field which the LORD God had made. And he said unto the woman, Yea, hath God said, Ye shall not eat of every tree of the garden?

3:2    女人对蛇说，园中树上的果子，我们可以吃，
And the woman said unto the serpent, We may eat of the fruit of the trees of the garden:

3:3    惟有园当中那棵树上的果子，神曾说，你们不可吃，也不可摸，免得你们死。
But of the fruit of the tree which is in the midst of the garden, God hath said, Ye shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it, lest ye die.

3:4    蛇对女人说，你们不一定死，
And the serpent said unto the woman, Ye shall not surely die:

3:5    因为神知道，你们吃的日子眼睛就明亮了，你们便如神能知道善恶。
For God doth know that in the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as gods, knowing good and evil.

3:6    于是女人见那棵树的果子好作食物，也悦人的眼目，且是可喜爱的，能使人有智慧，就摘下果子来吃了。又给她丈夫，她丈夫也吃了。
And when the woman saw that the tree was good for food, and that it was pleasant to the eyes, and a tree to be desired to make one wise, she took of the fruit thereof, and did eat, and gave also unto her husband with her; and he did eat.

3:7    他们二人的眼睛就明亮了，才知道自己是赤身露体，便拿无花果树的叶子，为自己编作裙子。
And the eyes of them both were opened, and they knew that they were naked; and they sewed fig leaves together, and made themselves aprons.

3:8    天起了凉风，耶和华神在园中行走。那人和他妻子听见神的声音，就藏在园里的树木中，躲避耶和华神的面。
And they heard the voice of the LORD God walking in the garden in the cool of the day: and Adam and his wife hid themselves from the presence of the LORD God amongst the trees of the garden.

3:9    耶和华神呼唤那人，对他说，你在哪里。
And the LORD God called unto Adam, and said unto him, Where art thou?

3:10    他说，我在园中听见你的声音，我就害怕。因为我赤身露体，我便藏了。
And he said, I heard thy voice in the garden, and I was afraid, because I was naked; and I hid myself.

3:11    耶和华说，谁告诉你赤身露体呢，莫非你吃了我吩咐你不可吃的那树上的果子吗。
And he said, Who told thee that thou wast naked? Hast thou eaten of the tree, whereof I commanded thee that thou shouldest not eat?

3:12    那人说，你所赐给我，与我同居的女人，她把那树上的果子给我，我就吃了。
And the man said, The woman whom thou gavest to be with me, she gave me of the tree, and I did eat.

3:13    耶和华神对女人说，你作的是什么事呢。女人说，那蛇引诱我，我就吃了。
And the LORD God said unto the woman, What is this that thou hast done? And the woman said, The serpent beguiled me, and I did eat.

3:14    耶和华神对蛇说，你既作了这事，就必受咒诅，比一切的牲畜野兽更甚。你必用肚子行走，终身吃土。
And the LORD God said unto the serpent, Because thou hast done this, thou art cursed above all cattle, and above every beast of the field; upon thy belly shalt thou go, and dust shalt thou eat all the days of thy life:

3:15    我又要叫你和女人彼此为仇。你的后裔和女人的后裔也彼此为仇。女人的后裔要伤你的头，你要伤他的脚跟。
And I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed; it shall bruise thy head, and thou shalt bruise his heel.



3:16    又对女人说，我必多多加增你怀胎的苦楚，你生产儿女必多受苦楚。你必恋慕你丈夫，你丈夫必管辖你。
Unto the woman he said, I will greatly multiply thy sorrow and thy conception; in sorrow thou shalt bring forth children; and thy desire shall be to thy husband, and he shall rule over thee.

3:17    又对亚当说，你既听从妻子的话，吃了我所吩咐你不可吃的那树上的果子，地必为你的缘故受咒诅。你必终身劳苦，才能从地里得吃的。
And unto Adam he said, Because thou hast hearkened unto the voice of thy wife, and hast eaten of the tree, of which I commanded thee, saying, Thou shalt not eat of it: cursed is the ground for thy sake; in sorrow shalt thou eat of it all the days of thy life;

3:18    地必给你长出荆棘和蒺藜来，你也要吃田间的菜蔬。
Thorns also and thistles shall it bring forth to thee; and thou shalt eat the herb of the field;

3:19    你必汗流满面才得糊口，直到你归了土，因为你是从土而出的。你本是尘土，仍要归于尘土。
In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread, till thou return unto the ground; for out of it wast thou taken: for dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou return.

3:20    亚当给他妻子起名叫夏娃，因为她是众生之母。
And Adam called his wife's name Eve; because she was the mother of all living.

3:21    耶和华神为亚当和他妻子用皮子作衣服给他们穿。
Unto Adam also and to his wife did the LORD God make coats of skins, and clothed them.

3:22    耶和华神说，那人已经与我们相似，能知道善恶。现在恐怕他伸手又摘生命树的果子吃，就永远活着。
And the LORD God said, Behold, the man is become as one of us, to know good and evil: and now, lest he put forth his hand, and take also of the tree of life, and eat, and live for ever:

3:23    耶和华神便打发他出伊甸园去，耕种他所自出之土。
Therefore the LORD God sent him forth from the garden of Eden, to till the ground from whence he was taken.

3:24    于是把他赶出去了。又在伊甸园的东边安设基路伯和四面转动发火焰的剑，要把守生命树的道路。
So he drove out the man; and he placed at the east of the garden of Eden Cherubims, and a flaming sword which turned every way, to keep the way of the tree of life.




旧约-- 创世记(Genesis) -- 第4 章( 本篇共有50 章)    　


4:1    有一日，那人和他妻子夏娃同房。夏娃就怀孕，生了该隐（就是得的意思），便说，耶和华使我得了一个男子。
And Adam knew Eve his wife; and she conceived, and bare Cain, and said, I have gotten a man from the LORD.

4:2    又生了该隐的兄弟亚伯。亚伯是牧羊的，该隐是种地的。
And she again bare his brother Abel. And Abel was a keeper of sheep, but Cain was a tiller of the ground.

4:3    有一日，该隐拿地里的出产为供物献给耶和华。
And in process of time it came to pass, that Cain brought of the fruit of the ground an offering unto the LORD.

4:4    亚伯也将他羊群中头生的和羊的脂油献上。耶和华看中了亚伯和他的供物，
And Abel, he also brought of the firstlings of his flock and of the fat thereof. And the LORD had respect unto Abel and to his offering:

4:5    只是看不中该隐和他的供物。该隐就大大地发怒，变了脸色。
But unto Cain and to his offering he had not respect. And Cain was very wroth, and his countenance fell.

4:6    耶和华对该隐说，你为什么发怒呢，你为什么变了脸色呢。
And the LORD said unto Cain, Why art thou wroth? and why is thy countenance fallen?

4:7    你若行得好，岂不蒙悦纳，你若行得不好，罪就伏在门前。它必恋慕你，你却要制伏它。
If thou doest well, shalt thou not be accepted? and if thou doest not well, sin lieth at the door. And unto thee shall be his desire, and thou shalt rule over him.

4:8    该隐与他兄弟亚伯说话，二人正在田间。该隐起来打他兄弟亚伯，把他杀了。
And Cain talked with Abel his brother: and it came to pass, when they were in the field, that Cain rose up against Abel his brother, and slew him.

4:9    耶和华对该隐说，你兄弟亚伯在那里。他说，我不知道，我岂是看守我兄弟的吗。
And the LORD said unto Cain, Where is Abel thy brother? And he said, I know not: Am I my brother's keeper?

4:10    耶和华说，你作了什么事呢，你兄弟的血，有声音从地里向我哀告。
And he said, What hast thou done? the voice of thy brother's blood crieth unto me from the ground.

4:11    地开了口，从你手里接受你兄弟的血。现在你必从这地受咒诅。
And now art thou cursed from the earth, which hath opened her mouth to receive thy brother's blood from thy hand;

4:12    你种地，地不再给你效力。你必流离飘荡在地上。
When thou tillest the ground, it shall not henceforth yield unto thee her strength; a fugitive and a vagabond shalt thou be in the earth.

4:13    该隐对耶和华说，我的刑罚太重，过于我所能当的。
And Cain said unto the LORD, My punishment is greater than I can bear.

4:14    你如今赶逐我离开这地，以致不见你面。我必流离飘荡在地上，凡遇见我的必杀我。
Behold, thou hast driven me out this day from the face of the earth; and from thy face shall I be hid; and I shall be a fugitive and a vagabond in the earth; and it shall come to pass, that every one that findeth me shall slay me.

4:15    耶和华对他说，凡杀该隐的，必遭报七倍。耶和华就给该隐立一个记号，免得人遇见他就杀他。
And the LORD said unto him, Therefore whosoever slayeth Cain, vengeance shall be taken on him sevenfold. And the LORD set a mark upon Cain, lest any finding him should kill him.

4:16    于是该隐离开耶和华的面，去住在伊甸东边挪得之地。
And Cain went out from the presence of the LORD, and dwelt in the land of Nod, on the east of Eden.

4:17    该隐与妻子同房，他妻子就怀孕，生了以诺。该隐建造了一座城，就按着他儿子的名，将那城叫作以诺。
And Cain knew his wife; and she conceived, and bare Enoch: and he builded a city, and called the name of the city, after the name of his son, Enoch.

4:18    以诺生以拿。以拿生米户雅利。米户雅利生玛土撒利。玛土撒利生拉麦。
And unto Enoch was born Irad: and Irad begat Mehujael: and Mehujael begat Methusael: and Methusael begat Lamech.

4:19    拉麦娶了两个妻，一个名叫亚大，一个名叫洗拉。
And Lamech took unto him two wives: the name of the one was Adah, and the name of the other Zillah.

4:20    亚大生雅八。雅八就是住帐棚，牧养牲畜之人的祖师。
And Adah bare Jabal: he was the father of such as dwell in tents, and of such as have cattle.

4:21    雅八的兄弟名叫犹八。他是一切弹琴吹箫之人的祖师。
And his brother's name was Jubal: he was the father of all such as handle the harp and organ.

4:22    洗拉又生了土八该隐。他是打造各样铜铁利器的（或作是铜匠铁匠的祖师）。土八该隐的妹子是拿玛。
And Zillah, she also bare Tubalcain, an instructer of every artificer in brass and iron: and the sister of Tubalcain was Naamah.

4:23    拉麦对他两个妻子说，亚大，洗拉，听我的声音。拉麦的妻子，细听我的话语，壮年人伤我，我把他杀了。少年人损我，我把他害了。
And Lamech said unto his wives, Adah and Zillah, Hear my voice; ye wives of Lamech, hearken unto my speech: for I have slain a man to my wounding, and a young man to my hurt.

4:24    若杀该隐，遭报七倍。杀拉麦，必遭报七十七倍。
If Cain shall be avenged sevenfold, truly Lamech seventy and sevenfold.

4:25    亚当又与妻子同房，她就生了一个儿子，起名叫塞特，意思说，神另给我立了一个儿子代替亚伯，因为该****了他。
And Adam knew his wife again; and she bare a son, and called his name Seth: For God, said she, hath appointed me another seed instead of Abel, whom Cain slew.

4:26    塞特也生了一个儿子，起名叫以挪士。那时候，人才求告耶和华的名。
And to Seth, to him also there was born a son; and he called his name Enos: then began men to call upon the name of the LORD.




旧约-- 创世记(Genesis) -- 第5 章( 本篇共有50 章)    　


5:1    亚当的后代记在下面。当神造人的日子，是照着自己的样式造的。
This is the book of the generations of Adam. In the day that God created man, in the likeness of God made he him;

5:2    并且造男造女。在他们被造的日子，神赐福给他们，称他们为人。
Male and female created he them; and blessed them, and called their name Adam, in the day when they were created.

5:3    亚当活到一百三十岁，生了一个儿子，形像样式和自己相似，就给他起名叫塞特。
And Adam lived an hundred and thirty years, and begat a son in his own likeness, after his image; and called his name Seth:

5:4    亚当生塞特之后，又在世八百年，并且生儿养女。
And the days of Adam after he had begotten Seth were eight hundred years: and he begat sons and daughters:

5:5    亚当共活了九百三十岁就死了。
And all the days that Adam lived were nine hundred and thirty years: and he died.

5:6    塞特活到一百零五岁，生了以挪士。
And Seth lived an hundred and five years, and begat Enos:

5:7    塞特生以挪士之后，又活了八百零七年，并且生儿养女。
And Seth lived after he begat Enos eight hundred and seven years, and begat sons and daughters:

5:8    塞特共活了九百一十二岁就死了。
And all the days of Seth were nine hundred and twelve years: and he died.

5:9    以挪士活到九十岁，生了该南。
And Enos lived ninety years, and begat Cainan:

5:10    以挪士生该南之后，又活了八百一十五年，并且生儿养女。
And Enos lived after he begat Cainan eight hundred and fifteen years, and begat sons and daughters:

5:11    以挪士共活了九百零五岁就死了。
And all the days of Enos were nine hundred and five years: and he died.

5:12    该南活到七十岁，生了玛勒列。
And Cainan lived seventy years, and begat Mahalaleel:

5:13    该南生玛勒列之后，又活了八百四十年，并且生儿养女。
And Cainan lived after he begat Mahalaleel eight hundred and forty years, and begat sons and daughters:

5:14    该南共活了九百一十岁就死了。
And all the days of Cainan were nine hundred and ten years: and he died.

5:15    玛勒列活到六十五岁，生了雅列。
And Mahalaleel lived sixty and five years, and begat Jared:

5:16    玛勒列生雅列之后，又活了八百三十年，并且生儿养女。
And Mahalaleel lived after he begat Jared eight hundred and thirty years, and begat sons and daughters:

5:17    玛勒列共活了八百九十五岁就死了。
And all the days of Mahalaleel were eight hundred ninety and five years: and he died.

5:18    雅列活到一百六十二岁，生了以诺。
And Jared lived an hundred sixty and two years, and he begat Enoch:

5:19    雅列生以诺之后，又活了八百年，并且生儿养女。
And Jared lived after he begat Enoch eight hundred years, and begat sons and daughters:

5:20    雅列共活了九百六十二岁就死了。
And all the days of Jared were nine hundred sixty and two years: and he died.

5:21    以诺活到六十五岁，生了玛土撒拉。
And Enoch lived sixty and five years, and begat Methuselah:

5:22    以诺生玛土撒拉之后，与神同行三百年，并且生儿养女。
And Enoch walked with God after he begat Methuselah three hundred years, and begat sons and daughters:

5:23    以诺共活了三百六十五岁。
And all the days of Enoch were three hundred sixty and five years:

5:24    以诺与神同行，神将他取去，他就不在世了。
And Enoch walked with God: and he was not; for God took him.

5:25    玛土撒拉活到一百八十七岁，生了拉麦。
And Methuselah lived an hundred eighty and seven years, and begat Lamech:

5:26    玛土撒拉生拉麦之后，又活了七百八十二年，并且生儿养女。
And Methuselah lived after he begat Lamech seven hundred eighty and two years, and begat sons and daughters:

5:27    玛土撒拉共活了九百六十九岁就死了。
And all the days of Methuselah were nine hundred sixty and nine years: and he died.

5:28    拉麦活到一百八十二岁，生了一个儿子，
And Lamech lived an hundred eighty and two years, and begat a son:

5:29    给他起名叫挪亚，说，这个儿子必为我们的操作和手中的劳苦安慰我们。这操作劳苦是因为耶和华咒诅地。
And he called his name Noah, saying, This same shall comfort us concerning our work and toil of our hands, because of the ground which the LORD hath cursed.

5:30    拉麦生挪亚之后，又活了五百九十五年，并且生儿养女。
And Lamech lived after he begat Noah five hundred ninety and five years, and begat sons and daughters:

5:31    拉麦共活了七百七十七岁就死了。
And all the days of Lamech were seven hundred seventy and seven years: and he died.

5:32    挪亚五百岁生了闪，含，雅弗。
And Noah was five hundred years old: and Noah begat Shem, Ham, and Japheth.




旧约-- 创世记(Genesis) -- 第6 章( 本篇共有50 章)    　


6:1    当人在世上多起来，又生女儿的时候，
And it came to pass, when men began to multiply on the face of the earth, and daughters were born unto them,

6:2    神的儿子们看见人的女子美貌，就随意挑选，娶来为妻。
That the sons of God saw the daughters of men that they were fair; and they took them wives of all which they chose.

6:3    耶和华说，人既属乎血气，我的灵就不永远住在他里面。然而他的日子还可到一百二十年。
And the LORD said, My spirit shall not always strive with man, for that he also is flesh: yet his days shall be an hundred and twenty years.

6:4    那时候有伟人在地上，后来神的儿子们和人的女子们交合生子，那就是上古英武有名的人。
There were giants in the earth in those days; and also after that, when the sons of God came in unto the daughters of men, and they bare children to them, the same became mighty men which were of old, men of renown.

6:5    耶和华见人在地上罪恶很大，终日所思想的尽都是恶。
And God saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth, and that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually.

6:6    耶和华就后悔造人在地上，心中忧伤。
And it repented the LORD that he had made man on the earth, and it grieved him at his heart.

6:7    耶和华说，我要将所造的人和走兽，并昆虫，以及空中的飞鸟，都从地上除灭，因为我造他们后悔了。
And the LORD said, I will destroy man whom I have created from the face of the earth; both man, and beast, and the creeping thing, and the fowls of the air; for it repenteth me that I have made them.

6:8    惟有挪亚在耶和华眼前蒙恩。
But Noah found grace in the eyes of the LORD.

6:9    挪亚的后代记在下面。挪亚是个义人，在当时的世代是个完全人。挪亚与神同行。
These are the generations of Noah: Noah was a just man and perfect in his generations, and Noah walked with God.

6:10    挪亚生了三个儿子，就是闪，含，雅弗。
And Noah begat three sons, Shem, Ham, and Japheth.

6:11    世界在神面前败坏，地上满了强暴。
The earth also was corrupt before God, and the earth was filled with violence.

6:12    神观看世界，见是败坏了。凡有血气的人，在地上都败坏了行为。
And God looked upon the earth, and, behold, it was corrupt; for all flesh had corrupted his way upon the earth.

6:13    神就对挪亚说，凡有血气的人，他的尽头已经来到我面前。因为地上满了他们的强暴，我要把他们和地一并毁灭。
And God said unto Noah, The end of all flesh is come before me; for the earth is filled with violence through them; and, behold, I will destroy them with the earth.

6:14    你要用歌斐木造一只方舟，分一间一间地造，里外抹上松香。
Make thee an ark of gopher wood; rooms shalt thou make in the ark, and shalt pitch it within and without with pitch.

6:15    方舟的造法乃是这样，要长三百肘，宽五十肘，高三十肘。
And this is the fashion which thou shalt make it of: The length of the ark shall be three hundred cubits, the breadth of it fifty cubits, and the height of it thirty cubits.

6:16    方舟上边要留透光处，高一肘。方舟的门要开在旁边。方舟要分上，中，下三层。
A window shalt thou make to the ark, and in a cubit shalt thou finish it above; and the door of the ark shalt thou set in the side thereof; with lower, second, and third stories shalt thou make it.

6:17    看哪！我要使洪水泛滥在地上，毁灭天下。凡地上有血肉，有气息的活物，无一不死。
And, behold, I, even I, do bring a flood of waters upon the earth, to destroy all flesh, wherein is the breath of life, from under heaven; and every thing that is in the earth shall die.

6:18    我却要与你立约，你同你的妻，与儿子，儿妇，都要进入方舟。
But with thee will I establish my covenant; and thou shalt come into the ark, thou, and thy sons, and thy wife, and thy sons' wives with thee.

6:19    凡有血肉的活物，每样两个，一公一母，你要带进方舟，好在你那里保全生命。
And of every living thing of all flesh, two of every sort shalt thou bring into the ark, to keep them alive with thee; they shall be male and female.

6:20    飞鸟各从其类，牲畜各从其类，地上的昆虫各从其类。每样两个，要到你那里，好保全生命。
Of fowls after their kind, and of cattle after their kind, of every creeping thing of the earth after his kind, two of every sort shall come unto thee, to keep them alive.

6:21    你要拿各样食物积蓄起来，好作你和它们的食物。
And take thou unto thee of all food that is eaten, and thou shalt gather it to thee; and it shall be for food for thee, and for them.

6:22    挪亚就这样行。凡神所吩咐的，他都照样行了。
Thus did Noah; according to all that God commanded him, so did he.




旧约-- 创世记(Genesis) -- 第7 章( 本篇共有50 章)    　


7:1    耶和华对挪亚说，你和你的全家都要进入方舟，因为在这世代中，我见你在我面前是义人。
And the LORD said unto Noah, Come thou and all thy house into the ark; for thee have I seen righteous before me in this generation.

7:2    凡洁净的畜类，你要带七公七母。不洁净的畜类，你要带一公一母。
Of every clean beast thou shalt take to thee by sevens, the male and his female: and of beasts that are not clean by two, the male and his female.

7:3    空中的飞鸟，也要带七公七母，可以留种，活在全地上。
Of fowls also of the air by sevens, the male and the female; to keep seed alive upon the face of all the earth.

7:4    因为再过七天，我要降雨在地上四十昼夜，把我所造的各种活物，都从地上除灭。
For yet seven days, and I will cause it to rain upon the earth forty days and forty nights; and every living substance that I have made will I destroy from off the face of the earth.

7:5    挪亚就遵着耶和华所吩咐的行了。
And Noah did according unto all that the LORD commanded him.

7:6    当洪水泛滥在地上的时候，挪亚整六百岁。
And Noah was six hundred years old when the flood of waters was upon the earth.



7:7    挪亚就同他的妻和儿子，儿妇，都进入方舟，躲避洪水。
And Noah went in, and his sons, and his wife, and his sons' wives with him, into the ark, because of the waters of the flood.

7:8    洁净的畜类和不洁净的畜类，飞鸟并地上一切的昆虫，
Of clean beasts, and of beasts that are not clean, and of fowls, and of every thing that creepeth upon the earth,

7:9    都是一对一对的，有公有母，到挪亚那里进入方舟，正如神所吩咐挪亚的。
There went in two and two unto Noah into the ark, the male and the female, as God had commanded Noah.

7:10    过了那七天，洪水泛滥在地上。
And it came to pass after seven days, that the waters of the flood were upon the earth.

7:11    当挪亚六百岁，二月十七日那一天，大渊的泉源都裂开了，天上的窗户也敞开了。
In the six hundredth year of Noah's life, in the second month, the seventeenth day of the month, the same day were all the fountains of the great deep broken up, and the windows of heaven were opened.

7:12    四十昼夜降大雨在地上。
And the rain was upon the earth forty days and forty nights.

7:13    正当那日，挪亚和他三个儿子闪，含，雅弗，并挪亚的妻子和三个儿妇，都进入方舟。
In the selfsame day entered Noah, and Shem, and Ham, and Japheth, the sons of Noah, and Noah's wife, and the three wives of his sons with them, into the ark;

7:14    他们和百兽，各从其类。一切牲畜，各从其类。爬在地上的昆虫，各从其类。一切禽鸟，各从其类。都进入方舟。
They, and every beast after his kind, and all the cattle after their kind, and every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth after his kind, and every fowl after his kind, every bird of every sort.

7:15    凡有血肉，有气息的活物，都一对一对的到挪亚那里，进入方舟。
And they went in unto Noah into the ark, two and two of all flesh, wherein is the breath of life.

7:16    凡有血肉进入方舟的，都是有公有母，正如神所吩咐挪亚的。耶和华就把他关在方舟里头。
And they that went in, went in male and female of all flesh, as God had commanded him: and the LORD shut him in.

7:17    洪水泛滥在地上四十天，水往上长，把方舟从地上漂起。
And the flood was forty days upon the earth; and the waters increased, and bare up the ark, and it was lift up above the earth.

7:18    水势浩大，在地上大大地往上长，方舟在水面上漂来漂去。
And the waters prevailed, and were increased greatly upon the earth; and the ark went upon the face of the waters.

7:19    水势在地上极其浩大，天下的高山都淹没了。
And the waters prevailed exceedingly upon the earth; and all the high hills, that were under the whole heaven, were covered.

7:20    水势比山高过十五肘，山岭都淹没了。
Fifteen cubits upward did the waters prevail; and the mountains were covered.

7:21    凡在地上有血肉的动物，就是飞鸟，牲畜，走兽，和爬在地上的昆虫，以及所有的人都死了。
And all flesh died that moved upon the earth, both of fowl, and of cattle, and of beast, and of every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth, and every man:

7:22    凡在旱地上，鼻孔有气息的生灵都死了。
All in whose nostrils was the breath of life, of all that was in the dry land, died.

7:23    凡地上各类的活物，连人带牲畜，昆虫，以及空中的飞鸟，都从地上除灭了，只留下挪亚和那些与他同在方舟里的。
And every living substance was destroyed which was upon the face of the ground, both man, and cattle, and the creeping things, and the fowl of the heaven; and they were destroyed from the earth: and Noah only remained alive, and they that were with him in the ark.

7:24    水势浩大，在地上共一百五十天。
And the waters prevailed upon the earth an hundred and fifty days.




旧约-- 创世记(Genesis) -- 第8 章( 本篇共有50 章)    　


8:1    神记念挪亚和挪亚方舟里的一切走兽牲畜。神叫风吹地，水势渐落。
And God remembered Noah, and every living thing, and all the cattle that was with him in the ark: and God made a wind to pass over the earth, and the waters asswaged;

8:2    渊源和天上的窗户都闭塞了，天上的大雨也止住了。
The fountains also of the deep and the windows of heaven were stopped, and the rain from heaven was restrained;

8:3    水从地上渐退。过了一百五十天，水就渐消。
And the waters returned from off the earth continually: and after the end of the hundred and fifty days the waters were abated.

8:4    七月十七日，方舟停在亚拉腊山上。
And the ark rested in the seventh month, on the seventeenth day of the month, upon the mountains of Ararat.

8:5    水又渐消，到十月初一日，山顶都现出来了。
And the waters decreased continually until the tenth month: in the tenth month, on the first day of the month, were the tops of the mountains seen.

8:6    过了四十天，挪亚开了方舟的窗户，
And it came to pass at the end of forty days, that Noah opened the window of the ark which he had made:

8:7    放出一只乌鸦去。那乌鸦飞来飞去，直到地上的水都乾了。
And he sent forth a raven, which went forth to and fro, until the waters were dried up from off the earth.

8:8    他又放出一只鸽子去，要看看水从地上退了没有。
Also he sent forth a dove from him, to see if the waters were abated from off the face of the ground;

8:9    但遍地上都是水，鸽子找不着落脚之地，就回到方舟挪亚那里，挪亚伸手把鸽子接进方舟来。
But the dove found no rest for the sole of her foot, and she returned unto him into the ark, for the waters were on the face of the whole earth: then he put forth his hand, and took her, and pulled her in unto him into the ark.

8:10    他又等了七天，再把鸽子从方舟放出去。
And he stayed yet other seven days; and again he sent forth the dove out of the ark;

8:11    到了晚上，鸽子回到他那里，嘴里叼着一个新拧下来的橄榄叶子，挪亚就知道地上的水退了。
And the dove came in to him in the evening; and, lo, in her mouth was an olive leaf pluckt off: so Noah knew that the waters were abated from off the earth.

8:12    他又等了七天，放出鸽子去，鸽子就不再回来了。
And he stayed yet other seven days; and sent forth the dove; which returned not again unto him any more.

8:13    到挪亚六百零一岁，正月初一日，地上的水都乾了。挪亚撤去方舟的盖观看，便见地面上乾了。
And it came to pass in the six hundredth and first year, in the first month, the first day of the month, the waters were dried up from off the earth: and Noah removed the covering of the ark, and looked, and, behold, the face of the ground was dry.

8:14    到了二月二十七日，地就都乾了。
And in the second month, on the seven and twentieth day of the month, was the earth dried.

8:15    神对挪亚说，
And God spake unto Noah, saying,

8:16    你和你的妻子，儿子，儿妇都可以出方舟。
Go forth of the ark, thou, and thy wife, and thy sons, and thy sons' wives with thee.

8:17    在你那里凡有血肉的活物，就是飞鸟，牲畜，和一切爬在地上的昆虫，都要带出来，叫它在地上多多滋生，大大兴旺。
Bring forth with thee every living thing that is with thee, of all flesh, both of fowl, and of cattle, and of every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth; that they may breed abundantly in the earth, and be fruitful, and multiply upon the earth.

8:18    于是挪亚和他的妻子，儿子，儿妇，都出来了。
And Noah went forth, and his sons, and his wife, and his sons' wives with him:

8:19    一切走兽，昆虫，飞鸟，和地上所有的动物，各从其类，也都出了方舟。
Every beast, every creeping thing, and every fowl, and whatsoever creepeth upon the earth, after their kinds, went forth out of the ark.

8:20    挪亚为耶和华筑了一座坛，拿各类洁净的牲畜，飞鸟献在坛上为燔祭。
And Noah builded an altar unto the LORD; and took of every clean beast, and of every clean fowl, and offered burnt offerings on the altar.

8:21    耶和华闻那馨香之气，就心里说，我不再因人的缘故咒诅地（人从小时心里怀着恶念），也不再按着我才行的，灭各种的活物了。
And the LORD smelled a sweet savour; and the LORD said in his heart, I will not again curse the ground any more for man's sake; for the imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth; neither will I again smite any more every thing living, as I have done.

8:22    地还存留的时候，稼穑，寒暑，冬夏，昼夜就永不停息了。
While the earth remaineth, seedtime and harvest, and cold and heat, and summer and winter, and day and night shall not cease.




旧约-- 创世记(Genesis) -- 第9 章( 本篇共有50 章)    　


9:1    神赐福给挪亚和他的儿子，对他们说，你们要生养众多，遍满了地。
And God blessed Noah and his sons, and said unto them, Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth.

9:2    凡地上的走兽和空中的飞鸟，都必惊恐，惧怕你们。连地上一切的昆虫并海里一切的鱼，都交付你们的手。
And the fear of you and the dread of you shall be upon every beast of the earth, and upon every fowl of the air, upon all that moveth upon the earth, and upon all the fishes of the sea; into your hand are they delivered.

9:3    凡活着的动物，都可以作你们的食物。这一切我都赐给你们，如同菜蔬一样。
Every moving thing that liveth shall be meat for you; even as the green herb have I given you all things.

9:4    惟独肉带着血，那就是它的生命，你们不可吃。
But flesh with the life thereof, which is the blood thereof, shall ye not eat.

9:5    流你们血，害你们命的，无论是兽，是人，我必讨他的罪，就是向各人的弟兄也是如此。
And surely your blood of your lives will I require; at the hand of every beast will I require it, and at the hand of man; at the hand of every man's brother will I require the life of man.

9:6    凡流人血的，他的血也必被人所流。因为神造人是照自己的形像造的。
Whoso sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed: for in the image of God made he man.

9:7    你们要生养众多，在地上昌盛繁茂。
And you, be ye fruitful, and multiply; bring forth abundantly in the earth, and multiply therein.

9:8    神晓谕挪亚和他的儿子说，
And God spake unto Noah, and to his sons with him, saying,

9:9    我与你们和你们的后裔立约，
And I, behold, I establish my covenant with you, and with your seed after you;



9:10    并与你们这里的一切活物，就是飞鸟，牲畜，走兽，凡从方舟里出来的活物立约。
And with every living creature that is with you, of the fowl, of the cattle, and of every beast of the earth with you; from all that go out of the ark, to every beast of the earth.

9:11    我与你们立约，凡有血肉的，不再被洪水灭绝，也不再有洪水毁坏地了。
And I will establish my covenant with you; neither shall all flesh be cut off any more by the waters of a flood; neither shall there any more be a flood to destroy the earth.

9:12    神说，我与你们并你们这里的各样活物所立的永约，是有记号的。
And God said, This is the token of the covenant which I make between me and you and every living creature that is with you, for perpetual generations:

9:13    我把虹放在云彩中，这就可作我与地立约的记号了。
I do set my bow in the cloud, and it shall be for a token of a covenant between me and the earth.

9:14    我使云彩盖地的时候，必有虹现在云彩中，
And it shall come to pass, when I bring a cloud over the earth, that the bow shall be seen in the cloud:

9:15    我便记念我与你们和各样有血肉的活物所立的约，水就再不泛滥，毁坏一切有血肉的物了。
And I will remember my covenant, which is between me and you and every living creature of all flesh; and the waters shall no more become a flood to destroy all flesh.

9:16    虹必现在云彩中，我看见，就要记念我与地上各样有血肉的活物所立的永约。
And the bow shall be in the cloud; and I will look upon it, that I may remember the everlasting covenant between God and every living creature of all flesh that is upon the earth.

9:17    神对挪亚说，这就是我与地上一切有血肉之物立约的记号了。
And God said unto Noah, This is the token of the covenant, which I have established between me and all flesh that is upon the earth.

9:18    出方舟挪亚的儿子就是闪，含，雅弗。含是迦南的父亲。
And the sons of Noah, that went forth of the ark, were Shem, and Ham, and Japheth: and Ham is the father of Canaan.

9:19    这是挪亚的三个儿子，他们的后裔分散在全地。
These are the three sons of Noah: and of them was the whole earth overspread.

9:20    挪亚作起农夫来，栽了一个葡萄园。
And Noah began to be an husbandman, and he planted a vineyard:

9:21    他喝了园中的酒便醉了，在帐棚里赤着身子。
And he drank of the wine, and was drunken; and he was uncovered within his tent.

9:22    迦南的父亲含，看见他父亲赤身，就到外边告诉他两个弟兄。
And Ham, the father of Canaan, saw the nakedness of his father, and told his two brethren without.

9:23    于是闪和雅弗，拿件衣服搭在肩上，倒退着进去，给他父亲盖上。他们背着脸就看不见父亲的赤身。
And Shem and Japheth took a garment, and laid it upon both their shoulders, and went backward, and covered the nakedness of their father; and their faces were backward, and they saw not their father's nakedness.

9:24    挪亚醒了酒，知道小儿子向他所作的事，
And Noah awoke from his wine, and knew what his younger son had done unto him.

9:25    就说，迦南当受咒诅，必给他弟兄作奴仆的奴仆。
And he said, Cursed be Canaan; a servant of servants shall he be unto his brethren.

9:26    又说，耶和华闪的神，是应当称颂的，愿迦南作闪的奴仆。
And he said, Blessed be the LORD God of Shem; and Canaan shall be his servant.

9:27    愿神使雅弗扩张，使他住在闪的帐棚里，又愿迦南作他的奴仆。
God shall enlarge Japheth, and he shall dwell in the tents of Shem; and Canaan shall be his servant.

9:28    洪水以后，挪亚又活了三百五十年。
And Noah lived after the flood three hundred and fifty years.

9:29    挪亚共活了九百五十岁就死了。
And all the days of Noah were nine hundred and fifty years: and he died.




旧约-- 创世记(Genesis) -- 第10 章( 本篇共有50 章)    　


10:1    挪亚的儿子闪，含，雅弗的后代，记在下面。洪水以后，他们都生了儿子。
Now these are the generations of the sons of Noah, Shem, Ham, and Japheth: and unto them were sons born after the flood.

10:2    雅弗的儿子是歌篾，玛各，玛代，雅完，土巴，米设，提拉。
The sons of Japheth; Gomer, and Magog, and Madai, and Javan, and Tubal, and Meshech, and Tiras.

10:3    歌篾的儿子是亚实基拿，利法，陀迦玛。
And the sons of Gomer; Ashkenaz, and Riphath, and Togarmah.

10:4    雅完的儿子是以利沙，他施，基提，多单。
And the sons of Javan; Elishah, and Tarshish, Kittim, and Dodanim.

10:5    这些人的后裔，将各国的地土，海岛，分开居住，各随各的方言，宗族立国。
By these were the isles of the Gentiles divided in their lands; every one after his tongue, after their families, in their nations.

10:6    含的儿子是古实，麦西，弗，迦南。
And the sons of Ham; Cush, and Mizraim, and Phut, and Canaan.

10:7    古实的儿子是西巴，哈腓拉，撒弗他，拉玛，撒弗提迦。拉玛的儿子是示巴，底但。
And the sons of Cush; Seba, and Havilah, and Sabtah, and Raamah, and Sabtechah: and the sons of Raamah; Sheba, and Dedan.

10:8    古实又生宁录，他为世上英雄之首。
And Cush begat Nimrod: he began to be a mighty one in the earth.

10:9    他在耶和华面前是个英勇的猎户，所以俗语说，像宁录在耶和华面前是个英勇的猎户。
He was a mighty hunter before the LORD: wherefore it is said, Even as Nimrod the mighty hunter before the LORD.

10:10    他国的起头是巴别，以力，亚甲，甲尼，都在示拿地。
And the beginning of his kingdom was Babel, and Erech, and Accad, and Calneh, in the land of Shinar.

10:11    他从那地出来往亚述去，建造尼尼微，利河伯，迦拉，
Out of that land went forth Asshur, and builded Nineveh, and the city Rehoboth, and Calah,

10:12    和尼尼微，迦拉中间的利鲜，这就是那大城。
And Resen between Nineveh and Calah: the same is a great city.

10:13    麦西生路低人，亚拿米人，利哈比人，拿弗土希人，
And Mizraim begat Ludim, and Anamim, and Lehabim, and Naphtuhim,

10:14    帕斯鲁细人，迦斯路希人，迦斐托人。从迦斐托出来的有非利士人。
And Pathrusim, and Casluhim, (out of whom came Philistim,) and Caphtorim.

10:15    迦南生长子西顿，又生赫
And Canaan begat Sidon his first born, and Heth,

10:16    和耶布斯人，亚摩利人，革迦撒人，
And the Jebusite, and the Amorite, and the Girgasite,

10:17    希未人，亚基人，西尼人，
And the Hivite, and the Arkite, and the Sinite,

10:18    亚瓦底人，洗玛利人，哈马人，后来迦南的诸族分散了。
And the Arvadite, and the Zemarite, and the Hamathite: and afterward were the families of the Canaanites spread abroad.

10:19    迦南的境界是从西顿向基拉耳的路上，直到迦萨，又向所多玛，蛾摩拉，押玛，洗扁的路上，直到拉沙。
And the border of the Canaanites was from Sidon, as thou comest to Gerar, unto Gaza; as thou goest, unto Sodom, and Gomorrah, and Admah, and Zeboim, even unto Lasha.

10:20    这就是含的后裔，各随他们的宗族，方言，所住的地土，邦国。
These are the sons of Ham, after their families, after their tongues, in their countries, and in their nations.

10:21    雅弗的哥哥闪，是希伯子孙之祖，他也生了儿子。
Unto Shem also, the father of all the children of Eber, the brother of Japheth the elder, even to him were children born.

10:22    闪的儿子是以拦，亚述，亚法撒，路德，亚兰。
The children of Shem; Elam, and Asshur, and Arphaxad, and Lud, and Aram.

10:23    亚兰的儿子是乌斯，户勒，基帖，玛施。
And the children of Aram; Uz, and Hul, and Gether, and Mash.

10:24    亚法撒生沙拉。沙拉生希伯。
And Arphaxad begat Salah; and Salah begat Eber.

10:25    希伯生了两个儿子，一个名叫法勒（法勒就是分的意思），因为那时人就分地居住。法勒的兄弟名叫约坍。
And unto Eber were born two sons: the name of one was Peleg; for in his days was the earth divided; and his brother's name was Joktan.

10:26    约坍生亚摩答，沙列，哈萨玛非，耶拉，
And Joktan begat Almodad, and Sheleph, and Hazarmaveth, and Jerah,

10:27    哈多兰，乌萨，德拉，
And Hadoram, and Uzal, and Diklah,

10:28    俄巴路，亚比玛利，示巴，
And Obal, and Abimael, and Sheba,

10:29    阿斐，哈腓拉，约巴，这都是约坍的儿子。
And Ophir, and Havilah, and Jobab: all these were the sons of Joktan.

10:30    他们所住的地方，是从米沙直到西发东边的山。
And their dwelling was from Mesha, as thou goest unto Sephar a mount of the east.

10:31    这就是闪的子孙，各随他们的宗族，方言，所住的地土，邦国。
These are the sons of Shem, after their families, after their tongues, in their lands, after their nations.

10:32    这些都是挪亚三个儿子的宗族，各随他们的支派立国。洪水以后，他们在地上分为邦国。
These are the families of the sons of Noah, after their generations, in their nations: and by these were the nations divided in the earth after the flood.




旧约-- 创世记(Genesis) -- 第11 章( 本篇共有50 章)    　


11:1    那时，天下人的口音，言语，都是一样。
And the whole earth was of one language, and of one speech.

11:2    他们往东边迁移的时候，在示拿地遇见一片平原，就住在那里。
And it came to pass, as they journeyed from the east, that they found a plain in the land of Shinar; and they dwelt there.

11:3    他们彼此商量说，来吧，我们要作砖，把砖烧透了。他们就拿砖当石头，又拿石漆当灰泥。
And they said one to another, Go to, let us make brick, and burn them thoroughly. And they had brick for stone, and slime had they for morter.

11:4    他们说，来吧，我们要建造一座城和一座塔，塔顶通天，为要传扬我们的名，免得我们分散在全地上。
And they said, Go to, let us build us a city and a tower, whose top may reach unto heaven; and let us make us a name, lest we be scattered abroad upon the face of the whole earth.

11:5    耶和华降临，要看看世人所建造的城和塔。
And the LORD came down to see the city and the tower, which the children of men builded.

11:6    耶和华说，看哪，他们成为一样的人民，都是一样的言语，如今既作起这事来，以后他们所要作的事就没有不成就的了。
And the LORD said, Behold, the people is one, and they have all one language; and this they begin to do: and now nothing will be restrained from them, which they have imagined to do.

11:7    我们下去，在那里变乱他们的口音，使他们的言语彼此不通。
Go to, let us go down, and there confound their language, that they may not understand one another's speech.

11:8    于是，耶和华使他们从那里分散在全地上。他们就停工，不造那城了。
So the LORD scattered them abroad from thence upon the face of all the earth: and they left off to build the city.

11:9    因为耶和华在那里变乱天下人的言语，使众人分散在全地上，所以那城名叫巴别（就是变乱的意思）。
Therefore is the name of it called Babel; because the LORD did there confound the language of all the earth: and from thence did the LORD scatter them abroad upon the face of all the earth.

11:10    闪的后代记在下面。洪水以后二年，闪一百岁生了亚法撒。
These are the generations of Shem: Shem was an hundred years old, and begat Arphaxad two years after the flood:

11:11    闪生亚法撒之后，又活了五百年，并且生儿养女。
And Shem lived after he begat Arphaxad five hundred years, and begat sons and daughters.

11:12    亚法撒活到三十五岁，生了沙拉。
And Arphaxad lived five and thirty years, and begat Salah:

11:13    亚法撒生沙拉之后，又活了四百零三年，并且生儿养女。
And Arphaxad lived after he begat Salah four hundred and three years, and begat sons and daughters.

11:14    沙拉活到三十岁，生了希伯。
And Salah lived thirty years, and begat Eber:

11:15    沙拉生希伯之后又活了四百零三年，并且生儿养女。
And Salah lived after he begat Eber four hundred and three years, and begat sons and daughters.

11:16    希伯活到三十四岁，生了法勒。
And Eber lived four and thirty years, and begat Peleg:

11:17    希伯生法勒之后，又活了四百三十年，并且生儿养女。
And Eber lived after he begat Peleg four hundred and thirty years, and begat sons and daughters.

11:18    法勒活到三十岁，生了拉吴。
And Peleg lived thirty years, and begat Reu:

11:19    法勒生拉吴之后，又活了二百零九年，并且生儿养女。
And Peleg lived after he begat Reu two hundred and nine years, and begat sons and daughters.

11:20    拉吴活到三十二岁，生了西鹿。
And Reu lived two and thirty years, and begat Serug:

11:21    拉吴生西鹿之后，又活了二百零七年，并且生儿养女。
And Reu lived after he begat Serug two hundred and seven years, and begat sons and daughters.

11:22    西鹿活到三十岁，生了拿鹤。
And Serug lived thirty years, and begat Nahor:

11:23    西鹿生拿鹤之后，又活了二百年，并且生儿养女。
And Serug lived after he begat Nahor two hundred years, and begat sons and daughters.

11:24    拿鹤活到二十九岁，生了他拉。
And Nahor lived nine and twenty years, and begat Terah:

11:25    拿鹤生他拉之后，又活了一百一十九年，并且生儿养女。
And Nahor lived after he begat Terah an hundred and nineteen years, and begat sons and daughters.

11:26    他拉活到七十岁，生了亚伯兰，拿鹤，哈兰。
And Terah lived seventy years, and begat Abram, Nahor, and Haran.

11:27    他拉的后代，记在下面，他拉生亚伯兰，拿鹤，哈兰。哈兰生罗得。
Now these are the generations of Terah: Terah begat Abram, Nahor, and Haran; and Haran begat Lot.

11:28    哈兰死在他的本地迦勒底的吾珥，在他父亲他拉之先。
And Haran died before his father Terah in the land of his nativity, in Ur of the Chaldees.

11:29    亚伯兰，拿鹤各娶了妻。亚伯兰的妻子名叫撒莱。拿鹤的妻子名叫密迦，是哈兰的女儿。哈兰是密迦和亦迦的父亲。
And Abram and Nahor took them wives: the name of Abram's wife was Sarai; and the name of Nahor's wife, Milcah, the daughter of Haran, the father of Milcah, and the father of Iscah.

11:30    撒莱不生育，没有孩子。
But Sarai was barren; she had no child.

11:31    他拉带着他儿子，亚伯兰和他孙子，哈兰的儿子罗得，并他儿妇亚伯兰的妻子撒莱，出了迦勒底的吾珥，要往迦南地去。他们走到哈兰，就住在那里。
And Terah took Abram his son, and Lot the son of Haran his son's son, and Sarai his daughter in law, his son Abram's wife; and they went forth with them from Ur of the Chaldees, to go into the land of Canaan; and they came unto Haran, and dwelt there.

11:32    他拉共活了二百零五岁，就死在哈兰。
And the days of Terah were two hundred and five years: and Terah died in Haran.






旧约-- 创世记(Genesis) -- 第12 章( 本篇共有50 章)    　


12:1    耶和华对亚伯兰说，你要离开本地，本族，父家，往我所要指示你的地去。
Now the LORD had said unto Abram, Get thee out of thy country, and from thy kindred, and from thy father's house, unto a land that I will shew thee:

12:2    我必叫你成为大国，我必赐福给你，叫你的名为大，你也要叫别人得福。
And I will make of thee a great nation, and I will bless thee, and make thy name great; and thou shalt be a blessing:

12:3    为你祝福的，我必赐福与他。那咒诅你的，我必咒诅他，地上的万族都要因你得福。
And I will bless them that bless thee, and curse him that curseth thee: and in thee shall all families of the earth be blessed.

12:4    亚伯兰就照着耶和华的吩咐去了。罗得也和他同去。亚伯兰出哈兰的时候，年七十五岁。
So Abram departed, as the LORD had spoken unto him; and Lot went with him: and Abram was seventy and five years old when he departed out of Haran.

12:5    亚伯兰将他妻子撒莱和侄儿罗得，连他们在哈兰所积蓄的财物，所得的人口，都带往迦南地去。他们就到了迦南地。
And Abram took Sarai his wife, and Lot his brother's son, and all their substance that they had gathered, and the souls that they had gotten in Haran; and they went forth to go into the land of Canaan; and into the land of Canaan they came.

12:6    亚伯兰经过那地，到了示剑地方，摩利橡树那里。那时迦南人住在那地。
And Abram passed through the land unto the place of Sichem, unto the plain of Moreh. And the Canaanite was then in the land.

12:7    耶和华向亚伯兰显现，说，我要把这地赐给你的后裔。亚伯兰就在那里为向他显现的耶和华筑了一座坛。
And the LORD appeared unto Abram, and said, Unto thy seed will I give this land: and there builded he an altar unto the LORD, who appeared unto him.

12:8    从那里他又迁到伯特利东边的山，支搭帐棚。西边是伯特利，东边是艾。他在那里又为耶和华筑了一座坛，求告耶和华的名。
And he removed from thence unto a mountain on the east of Bethel, and pitched his tent, having Bethel on the west, and Hai on the east: and there he builded an altar unto the LORD, and called upon the name of the LORD.

12:9    后来亚伯兰又渐渐迁往南地去。
And Abram journeyed, going on still toward the south.

12:10    那地遭遇饥荒。因饥荒甚大，亚伯兰就下埃及去，要在那里暂居。
And there was a famine in the land: and Abram went down into Egypt to sojourn there; for the famine was grievous in the land.

12:11    将近埃及，就对他妻子撒莱说，我知道你是容貌俊美的妇人。
And it came to pass, when he was come near to enter into Egypt, that he said unto Sarai his wife, Behold now, I know that thou art a fair woman to look upon:

12:12    埃及人看见你必说，这是他的妻子，他们就要杀我，却叫你存活。
Therefore it shall come to pass, when the Egyptians shall see thee, that they shall say, This is his wife: and they will kill me, but they will save thee alive.

12:13    求你说，你是我的妹子，使我因你得平安，我的命也因你存活。
Say, I pray thee, thou art my sister: that it may be well with me for thy sake; and my soul shall live because of thee.

12:14    及至亚伯兰到了埃及，埃及人看见那妇人极其美貌。
And it came to pass, that, when Abram was come into Egypt, the Egyptians beheld the woman that she was very fair.

12:15    法老的臣宰看见了她，就在法老面前夸奖她。那妇人就被带进法老的宫去。
The princes also of Pharaoh saw her, and commended her before Pharaoh: and the woman was taken into Pharaoh's house.

12:16    法老因这妇人就厚待亚伯兰，亚伯兰得了许多牛，羊，骆驼，公驴，母驴，仆婢。
And he entreated Abram well for her sake: and he had sheep, and oxen, and he asses, and menservants, and maidservants, and she asses, and camels.

12:17    耶和华因亚伯兰妻子撒莱的缘故，降大灾与法老和他的全家。
And the LORD plagued Pharaoh and his house with great plagues because of Sarai Abram's wife.

12:18    法老就召了亚伯兰来，说，你这向我作的是什么事呢，为什么没有告诉我她是你的妻子，
And Pharaoh called Abram, and said, What is this that thou hast done unto me? why didst thou not tell me that she was thy wife?

12:19    为什么说她是你的妹子，以致我把她取来要作我的妻子，现在你的妻子在这里，可以带她走吧。
Why saidst thou, She is my sister? so I might have taken her to me to wife: now therefore behold thy wife, take her, and go thy way.

12:20    于是法老吩咐人将亚伯兰和他妻子，并他所有的都送走了。
And Pharaoh commanded his men concerning him: and they sent him away, and his wife, and all that he had.




旧约-- 创世记(Genesis) -- 第13 章( 本篇共有50 章)    　


13:1    亚伯兰带着他的妻子与罗得，并一切所有的，都从埃及上南地去。
And Abram went up out of Egypt, he, and his wife, and all that he had, and Lot with him, into the south.

13:2    亚伯兰的金，银，牲畜极多。
And Abram was very rich in cattle, in silver, and in gold.

13:3    他从南地渐渐往伯特利去，到了伯特利和艾的中间，就是从前支搭帐棚的地方，
And he went on his journeys from the south even to Bethel, unto the place where his tent had been at the beginning, between Bethel and Hai;

13:4    也是他起先筑坛的地方，他又在那里求告耶和华的名。
Unto the place of the altar, which he had made there at the first: and there Abram called on the name of the LORD.

13:5    与亚伯兰同行的罗得也有牛群，羊群，帐棚。
And Lot also, which went with Abram, had flocks, and herds, and tents.

13:6    那地容不下他们，因为他们的财物甚多，使他们不能同居。
And the land was not able to bear them, that they might dwell together: for their substance was great, so that they could not dwell together.

13:7    当时，迦南人与比利洗人在那地居住。亚伯兰的牧人和罗得的牧人相争。
And there was a strife between the herdmen of Abram's cattle and the herdmen of Lot's cattle: and the Canaanite and the Perizzite dwelled then in the land.

13:8    亚伯兰就对罗得说，你我不可相争，你的牧人和我的牧人也不可相争，因为我们是骨肉（原文作弟兄）。
And Abram said unto Lot, Let there be no strife, I pray thee, between me and thee, and between my herdmen and thy herdmen; for we be brethren.

13:9    遍地不都在你眼前吗。请你离开我，你向左，我就向右。你向右，我就向左。
Is not the whole land before thee? separate thyself, I pray thee, from me: if thou wilt take the left hand, then I will go to the right; or if thou depart to the right hand, then I will go to the left.

13:10    罗得举目看见约旦河的全平原，直到琐珥，都是滋润的，那地在耶和华未灭所多玛，蛾摩拉以先如同耶和华的园子，也像埃及地。
And Lot lifted up his eyes, and beheld all the plain of Jordan, that it was well watered every where, before the LORD destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah, even as the garden of the LORD, like the land of Egypt, as thou comest unto Zoar.

13:11    于是罗得选择约旦河的全平原，往东迁移。他们就彼此分离了。
Then Lot chose him all the plain of Jordan; and Lot journeyed east: and they separated themselves the one from the other.

13:12    亚伯兰住在迦南地，罗得住在平原的城邑，渐渐挪移帐棚，直到所多玛。
Abram dwelled in the land of Canaan, and Lot dwelled in the cities of the plain, and pitched his tent toward Sodom.

13:13    所多玛人在耶和华面前罪大恶极。
But the men of Sodom were wicked and sinners before the LORD exceedingly.

13:14    罗得离别亚伯兰以后，耶和华对亚伯兰说，从你所在的地方，你举目向东西南北观看。
And the LORD said unto Abram, after that Lot was separated from him, Lift up now thine eyes, and look from the place where thou art northward, and southward, and eastward, and westward:

13:15    凡你所看见的一切地，我都要赐给你和你的后裔，直到永远。
For all the land which thou seest, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed for ever.

13:16    我也要使你的后裔如同地上的尘沙那样多，人若能数算地上的尘沙才能数算你的后裔。
And I will make thy seed as the dust of the earth: so that if a man can number the dust of the earth, then shall thy seed also be numbered.

13:17    你起来，纵横走遍这地，因为我必把这地赐给你。
Arise, walk through the land in the length of it and in the breadth of it; for I will give it unto thee.

13:18    亚伯兰就搬了帐棚，来到希伯仑幔利的橡树那里居住，在那里为耶和华筑了一座坛。
Then Abram removed his tent, and came and dwelt in the plain of Mamre, which is in Hebron, and built there an altar unto the LORD.




旧约-- 创世记(Genesis) -- 第14 章( 本篇共有50 章)    　


14:1    当暗拉非作示拿王，亚略作以拉撒王，基大老玛作以拦王，提达作戈印王的时候，
And it came to pass in the days of Amraphel king of Shinar, Arioch king of Ellasar, Chedorlaomer king of Elam, and Tidal king of nations;

14:2    他们都攻打所多玛王比拉，蛾摩拉王比沙，押玛王示纳，洗扁王善以别，和比拉王。比拉就是琐珥。
That these made war with Bera king of Sodom, and with Birsha king of Gomorrah, Shinab king of Admah, and Shemeber king of Zeboiim, and the king of Bela, which is Zoar.

14:3    这五王都在西订谷会合。西订谷就是盐海。
All these were joined together in the vale of Siddim, which is the salt sea.

14:4    他们已经事奉基大老玛十二年，到十三年就背叛了。
Twelve years they served Chedorlaomer, and in the thirteenth year they rebelled.

14:5    十四年，基大老玛和同盟的王都来在亚特律加宁，杀败了利乏音人，在哈麦杀败了苏西人，在沙微基列亭杀败了以米人，
And in the fourteenth year came Chedorlaomer, and the kings that were with him, and smote the Rephaims in Ashteroth Karnaim, and the Zuzims in Ham, and the Emims in Shaveh Kiriathaim,

14:6    在何利人的西珥山杀败了何利人，一直杀到靠近旷野的伊勒巴兰。
And the Horites in their mount Seir, unto Elparan, which is by the wilderness.

14:7    他们回到安密巴，就是加低斯，杀败了亚玛力全地的人，以及住在哈洗逊他玛的亚摩利人。
And they returned, and came to Enmishpat, which is Kadesh, and smote all the country of the Amalekites, and also the Amorites, that dwelt in Hazezontamar.

14:8    于是所多玛王，蛾摩拉王，押玛王，洗扁王，和比拉王（比拉就是琐珥）都出来，在西订谷摆阵，与他们交战，
And there went out the king of Sodom, and the king of Gomorrah, and the king of Admah, and the king of Zeboiim, and the king of Bela (the same is Zoar;) and they joined battle with them in the vale of Siddim;

14:9    就是与以拦王基大老玛，戈印王提达，示拿王暗拉非，以拉撒王亚略交战。乃是四王与五王交战。
With Chedorlaomer the king of Elam, and with Tidal king of nations, and Amraphel king of Shinar, and Arioch king of Ellasar; four kings with five.

14:10    西订谷有许多石漆坑。所多玛王和蛾摩拉王逃跑，有掉在坑里的，其馀的人都往山上逃跑。
And the vale of Siddim was full of slimepits; and the kings of Sodom and Gomorrah fled, and fell there; and they that remained fled to the mountain.

14:11    四王就把所多玛和蛾摩拉所有的财物，并一切的粮食都掳掠去了。
And they took all the goods of Sodom and Gomorrah, and all their victuals, and went their way.

14:12    又把亚伯兰的侄儿罗得和罗得的财物掳掠去了。当时罗得正住在所多玛。
And they took Lot, Abram's brother's son, who dwelt in Sodom, and his goods, and departed.

14:13    有一个逃出来的人告诉希伯来人亚伯兰。亚伯兰正住在亚摩利人幔利的橡树那里。幔利和以实各并亚乃都是弟兄，曾与亚伯兰联盟。
And there came one that had escaped, and told Abram the Hebrew; for he dwelt in the plain of Mamre the Amorite, brother of Eshcol, and brother of Aner: and these were confederate with Abram.

14:14    亚伯兰听见他侄儿（原文是弟兄）被掳去，就率领他家里生养的精练壮丁三百一十八人，直追到但，
And when Abram heard that his brother was taken captive, he armed his trained servants, born in his own house, three hundred and eighteen, and pursued them unto Dan.

14:15    便在夜间，自己同仆人分队杀败敌人，又追到大马士革左边的何把，
And he divided himself against them, he and his servants, by night, and smote them, and pursued them unto Hobah, which is on the left hand of Damascus.

14:16    将被掳掠的一切财物夺回来，连他侄儿罗得和他的财物，以及妇女，人民也都夺回来。
And he brought back all the goods, and also brought again his brother Lot, and his goods, and the women also, and the people.

14:17    亚伯兰杀败基大老玛和与他同盟的王回来的时候，所多玛王出来，在沙微谷迎接他。沙微谷就是王谷。
And the king of Sodom went out to meet him after his return from the slaughter of Chedorlaomer, and of the kings that were with him, at the valley of Shaveh, which is the king's dale.

14:18    又有撒冷王麦基洗德带着饼和酒出来迎接。他是至高神的祭司。
And Melchizedek king of Salem brought forth bread and wine: and he was the priest of the most high God.

14:19    他为亚伯兰祝福，说，愿天地的主，至高的神赐福与亚伯兰
And he blessed him, and said, Blessed be Abram of the most high God, possessor of heaven and earth:

14:20    至高的神把敌人交在你手里，是应当称颂的。亚伯兰就把所得的拿出十分之一来，给麦基洗德。
And blessed be the most high God, which hath delivered thine enemies into thy hand. And he gave him tithes of all.

14:21    所多玛王对亚伯兰说，你把人口给我，财物你自己拿去吧。
And the king of Sodom said unto Abram, Give me the persons, and take the goods to thyself.

14:22    亚伯兰对所多玛王说，我已经向天地的主至高的神耶和华起誓。
And Abram said to the king of Sodom, I have lift up mine hand unto the LORD, the most high God, the possessor of heaven and earth,

14:23    凡是你的东西，就是一根线，一根鞋带，我都不拿，免得你说，我使亚伯兰富足。
That I will not take from a thread even to a shoelatchet, and that I will not take any thing that is thine, lest thou shouldest say, I have made Abram rich:

14:24    只有仆人所吃的，并与我同行的亚乃，以实各，幔利所应得的分，可以任凭他们拿去。
Save only that which the young men have eaten, and the portion of the men which went with me, Aner, Eshcol, and Mamre; let them take their portion.




旧约-- 创世记(Genesis) -- 第15 章( 本篇共有50 章)    　


15:1    这事以后，耶和华在异象中有话对亚伯兰说，亚伯兰，你不要惧怕，我是你的盾牌，必大大地赏赐你。
After these things the word of the LORD came unto Abram in a vision, saying, Fear not, Abram: I am thy shield, and thy exceeding great reward.

15:2    亚伯兰说，主耶和华阿，我既无子，你还赐我什么呢，并且要承受我家业的是大马士革人以利以谢。
And Abram said, LORD God, what wilt thou give me, seeing I go childless, and the steward of my house is this Eliezer of Damascus?

15:3    亚伯兰又说，你没有给我儿子。那生在我家中的人就是我的后嗣。
And Abram said, Behold, to me thou hast given no seed: and, lo, one born in my house is mine heir.

15:4    耶和华又有话对他说，这人必不成为你的后嗣。你本身所生的才成为你的后嗣。
And, behold, the word of the LORD came unto him, saying, This shall not be thine heir; but he that shall come forth out of thine own bowels shall be thine heir.

15:5    于是领他走到外边，说，你向天观看，数算众星，能数得过来吗。又对他说，你的后裔将要如此。
And he brought him forth abroad, and said, Look now toward heaven, and tell the stars, if thou be able to number them: and he said unto him, So shall thy seed be.

15:6    亚伯兰信耶和华，耶和华就以此为他的义。
And he believed in the LORD; and he counted it to him for righteousness.

15:7    耶和华又对他说，我是耶和华，曾领你出了迦勒底的吾珥，为要将这地赐你为业。
And he said unto him, I am the LORD that brought thee out of Ur of the Chaldees, to give thee this land to inherit it.

15:8    亚伯兰说，主耶和华阿，我怎能知道必得这地为业呢。
And he said, LORD God, whereby shall I know that I shall inherit it?

15:9    他说，你为我取一只三年的母牛，一只三年的母山羊，一只三年的公绵羊，一只斑鸠，一只雏鸽。
And he said unto him, Take me an heifer of three years old, and a she goat of three years old, and a ram of three years old, and a turtledove, and a young pigeon.

15:10    亚伯兰就取了这些来，每样劈开，分成两半，一半对着一半地摆列，只有鸟没有劈开。
And he took unto him all these, and divided them in the midst, and laid each piece one against another: but the birds divided he not.

15:11    有鸷鸟下来，落在那死畜的肉上，亚伯兰就把它吓飞了。
And when the fowls came down upon the carcases, Abram drove them away.

15:12    日头正落的时候，亚伯兰沉沉地睡了。忽然有惊人的大黑暗落在他身上。
And when the sun was going down, a deep sleep fell upon Abram; and, lo, an horror of great darkness fell upon him.

15:13    耶和华对亚伯兰说，你要的确知道，你的后裔必寄居别人的地，又服事那地的人。那地的人要苦待他们四百年。
And he said unto Abram, Know of a surety that thy seed shall be a stranger in a land that is not theirs, and shall serve them; and they shall afflict them four hundred years;

15:14    并且他们所要服事的那国，我要惩罚，后来他们必带着许多财物从那里出来。
And also that nation, whom they shall serve, will I judge: and afterward shall they come out with great substance.

15:15    但你要享大寿数，平平安安地归到你列祖那里，被人埋葬。
And thou shalt go to thy fathers in peace; thou shalt be buried in a good old age.

15:16    到了第四代，他们必回到此地，因为亚摩利人的罪孽还没有满盈。
But in the fourth generation they shall come hither again: for the iniquity of the Amorites is not yet full.

15:17    日落天黑，不料有冒烟的炉并烧着的火把从那些肉块中经过。
And it came to pass, that, when the sun went down, and it was dark, behold a smoking furnace, and a burning lamp that passed between those pieces.

15:18    当那日，耶和华与亚伯兰立约，说，我已赐给你的后裔，从埃及河直到伯大河之地，
In the same day the LORD made a covenant with Abram, saying, Unto thy seed have I given this land, from the river of Egypt unto the great river, the river Euphrates:

15:19    就是基尼人，基尼洗人，甲摩尼人，
The Kenites, and the Kenizzites, and the Kadmonites,

15:20    赫人，比利洗人，利乏音人，
And the Hittites, and the Perizzites, and the Rephaims,

15:21    亚摩利人，迦南人，革迦撒人，耶布斯人之地。
And the Amorites, and the Canaanites, and the Girgashites, and the Jebusites.




旧约-- 创世记(Genesis) -- 第16 章( 本篇共有50 章)    　


16:1    亚伯兰的妻子撒莱不给他生儿女。撒莱有一个使女，名叫夏甲，是埃及人。
Now Sarai Abram's wife bare him no children: and she had an handmaid, an Egyptian, whose name was Hagar.

16:2    撒莱对亚伯兰说，耶和华使我不能生育。求你和我的使女同房，或者我可以因她得孩子（得孩子原文作被建立）。亚伯兰听从了撒莱的话。
And Sarai said unto Abram, Behold now, the LORD hath restrained me from bearing: I pray thee, go in unto my maid; it may be that I may obtain children by her. And Abram hearkened to the voice of Sarai.

16:3    于是亚伯兰的妻子撒莱将使女埃及人夏甲给了丈夫为妾。那时亚伯兰在迦南已经住了十年。
And Sarai Abram's wife took Hagar her maid the Egyptian, after Abram had dwelt ten years in the land of Canaan, and gave her to her husband Abram to be his wife.

16:4    亚伯兰与夏甲同房，夏甲就怀了孕。她见自己有孕，就小看她的主母。
And he went in unto Hagar, and she conceived: and when she saw that she had conceived, her mistress was despised in her eyes.

16:5    撒莱对亚伯兰说，我因你受屈。我将我的使女放在你怀中，她见自己有了孕，就小看我。愿耶和华在你我中间判断。
And Sarai said unto Abram, My wrong be upon thee: I have given my maid into thy bosom; and when she saw that she had conceived, I was despised in her eyes: the LORD judge between me and thee.

16:6    亚伯兰对撒莱说，使女在你手下，你可以随意待她。撒莱苦待她，她就从撒莱面前逃走了。
But Abram said unto Sarai, Behold, thy maid is in thy hand; do to her as it pleaseth thee. And when Sarai dealt hardly with her, she fled from her face.

16:7    耶和华的使者在旷野书珥路上的水泉旁遇见她，
And the angel of the LORD found her by a fountain of water in the wilderness, by the fountain in the way to Shur.

16:8    对她说，撒莱的使女夏甲，你从哪里来，要往哪里去。夏甲说，我从我的主母撒莱面前逃出来。
And he said, Hagar, Sarai's maid, whence camest thou? and whither wilt thou go? And she said, I flee from the face of my mistress Sarai.

16:9    耶和华的使者对她说，你回到你主母那里，服在她手下。
And the angel of the LORD said unto her, Return to thy mistress, and submit thyself under her hands.

16:10    又说，我必使你的后裔极其繁多，甚至不可胜数。
And the angel of the LORD said unto her, I will multiply thy seed exceedingly, that it shall not be numbered for multitude.

16:11    并说，你如今怀孕要生一个儿子，可以给他起名叫以实玛利，因为耶和华听见了你的苦情。（以实玛利就是神听见的意思）
And the angel of the LORD said unto her, Behold, thou art with child, and shalt bear a son, and shalt call his name Ishmael; because the LORD hath heard thy affliction.

16:12    他为人必像野驴。他的手要攻打人，人的手也要攻打他。他必住在众弟兄的东边。
And he will be a wild man; his hand will be against every man, and every man's hand against him; and he shall dwell in the presence of all his brethren.

16:13    夏甲就称那对她说话的耶和华为『看顾人的神』。因而说，在这里我也看见那看顾我的吗。
And she called the name of the LORD that spake unto her, Thou God seest me: for she said, Have I also here looked after him that seeth me?

16:14    所以这井名叫庇耳拉海莱。这井正在加低斯和巴列中间。
Wherefore the well was called Beerlahairoi; behold, it is between Kadesh and Bered.

16:15    后来夏甲给亚伯兰生了一个儿子。亚伯兰给他起名叫以实玛利。
And Hagar bare Abram a son: and Abram called his son's name, which Hagar bare, Ishmael.

16:16    夏甲给亚伯兰生以实玛利的时候，亚伯兰年八十六岁。
And Abram was fourscore and six years old, when Hagar bare Ishmael to Abram.




旧约-- 创世记(Genesis) -- 第17 章( 本篇共有50 章)    　


17:1    亚伯兰年九十九岁的时候，耶和华向他显现，对他说，我是全能的神。你当在我面前作完全人，
And when Abram was ninety years old and nine, the LORD appeared to Abram, and said unto him, I am the Almighty God; walk before me, and be thou perfect.

17:2    我就与你立约，使你的后裔极其繁多。
And I will make my covenant between me and thee, and will multiply thee exceedingly.

17:3    亚伯兰俯伏在地。神又对他说，
And Abram fell on his face: and God talked with him, saying,

17:4    我与你立约，你要作多国的父。
As for me, behold, my covenant is with thee, and thou shalt be a father of many nations.

17:5    从此以后，你的名不再叫亚伯兰，要叫亚伯拉罕，因为我已立你作多国的父。
Neither shall thy name any more be called Abram, but thy name shall be Abraham; for a father of many nations have I made thee.

17:6    我必使你的后裔极其繁多。国度从你而立，君王从你而出。
And I will make thee exceeding fruitful, and I will make nations of thee, and kings shall come out of thee.

17:7    我要与你并你世世代代的后裔坚立我的约，作永远的约，是要作你和你后裔的神。
And I will establish my covenant between me and thee and thy seed after thee in their generations for an everlasting covenant, to be a God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee.

17:8    我要将你现在寄居的地，就是迦南全地，赐给你和你的后裔永远为业，我也必作他们的神。
And I will give unto thee, and to thy seed after thee, the land wherein thou art a stranger, all the land of Canaan, for an everlasting possession; and I will be their God.

17:9    神又对亚伯拉罕说，你和你的后裔，必世世代代遵守我的约。
And God said unto Abraham, Thou shalt keep my covenant therefore, thou, and thy seed after thee in their generations.

17:10    你们所有的男子，都要受割礼。这就是我与你，并你的后裔所立的约，是你们所当遵守的。
This is my covenant, which ye shall keep, between me and you and thy seed after thee; Every man child among you shall be circumcised.

17:11    你们都要受割礼（受割礼原文作割阳皮。14 ，23 ，24 ，25节同），这是我与你们立约的证据。
And ye shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskin; and it shall be a token of the covenant betwixt me and you.

17:12    你们世世代代的男子，无论是家里生的，是在你后裔之外用银子从外人买的，生下来第八日，都要受割礼。
And he that is eight days old shall be circumcised among you, every man child in your generations, he that is born in the house, or bought with money of any stranger, which is not of thy seed.

17:13    你家里生的和你用银子买的，都必须受割礼。这样，我的约就立在你们肉体上作永远的约。
He that is born in thy house, and he that is bought with thy money, must needs be circumcised: and my covenant shall be in your flesh for an everlasting covenant.

17:14    但不受割礼的男子，必从民中剪除，因他背了我的约。
And the uncircumcised man child whose flesh of his foreskin is not circumcised, that soul shall be cut off from his people; he hath broken my covenant.

17:15    神又对亚伯拉罕说，你的妻子撒莱，不可再叫撒莱，她的名要叫撒拉。
And God said unto Abraham, As for Sarai thy wife, thou shalt not call her name Sarai, but Sarah shall her name be.

17:16    我必赐福给她，也要使你从她得一个儿子。我要赐福给她，她也要作多国之母。必有百姓的君王从她而出。
And I will bless her, and give thee a son also of her: yea, I will bless her, and she shall be a mother of nations; kings of people shall be of her.

17:17    亚伯拉罕就俯伏在地喜笑，心里说，一百岁的人还能得孩子吗。撒拉已经九十岁了，还能生养吗。
Then Abraham fell upon his face, and laughed, and said in his heart, Shall a child be born unto him that is an hundred years old? and shall Sarah, that is ninety years old, bear?

17:18    亚伯拉罕对神说，但愿以实玛利活在你面前。
And Abraham said unto God, O that Ishmael might live before thee!

17:19    神说，不然，你妻子撒拉要给你生一个儿子，你要给他起名叫以撒。我要与他坚定所立的约，作他后裔永远的约。
And God said, Sarah thy wife shall bear thee a son indeed; and thou shalt call his name Isaac: and I will establish my covenant with him for an everlasting covenant, and with his seed after him.

17:20    至于以实玛利，我也应允你，我必赐福给他，使他昌盛极其繁多，他必生十二个族长，我也要使他成为大国。
And as for Ishmael, I have heard thee: Behold, I have blessed him, and will make him fruitful, and will multiply him exceedingly; twelve princes shall he beget, and I will make him a great nation.

17:21    到明年这时节，撒拉必给你生以撒，我要与他坚定所立的约。
But my covenant will I establish with Isaac, which Sarah shall bear unto thee at this set time in the next year.

17:22    神和亚伯拉罕说完了话，就离开他上升去了。
And he left off talking with him, and God went up from Abraham.

17:23    正当那日，亚伯拉罕遵着神的命，给他的儿子以实玛利和家里的一切男子，无论是在家里生的，是用银子买的，都行了割礼。
And Abraham took Ishmael his son, and all that were born in his house, and all that were bought with his money, every male among the men of Abraham's house; and circumcised the flesh of their foreskin in the selfsame day, as God had said unto him.

17:24    亚伯拉罕受割礼的时候，年九十九岁。
And Abraham was ninety years old and nine, when he was circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin.

17:25    他儿子以实玛利受割礼的时候，年十三岁。
And Ishmael his son was thirteen years old, when he was circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin.

17:26    正当那日，亚伯拉罕和他儿子以实玛利，一同受了割礼。
In the selfsame day was Abraham circumcised, and Ishmael his son.

17:27    家里所有的人，无论是在家里生的，是用银子从外人买的，也都一同受了割礼。
And all the men of his house, born in the house, and bought with money of the stranger, were circumcised with him.




旧约-- 创世记(Genesis) -- 第18 章( 本篇共有50 章)    　


18:1    耶和华在幔利橡树那里，向亚伯拉罕显现出来。那时正热，亚伯拉罕坐在帐棚门口，
And the LORD appeared unto him in the plains of Mamre: and he sat in the tent door in the heat of the day;

18:2    举目观看，见有三个人在对面站着。他一见，就从帐棚门口跑去迎接他们，俯伏在地，
And he lift up his eyes and looked, and, lo, three men stood by him: and when he saw them, he ran to meet them from the tent door, and bowed himself toward the ground,

18:3    说，我主，我若在你眼前蒙恩，求你不要离开仆人往前去。
And said, My LORD, if now I have found favour in thy sight, pass not away, I pray thee, from thy servant:

18:4    容我拿点水来，你们洗洗脚，在树下歇息歇息。
Let a little water, I pray you, be fetched, and wash your feet, and rest yourselves under the tree:

18:5    我再拿一点饼来，你们可以加添心力，然后往前去。你们既到仆人这里来，理当如此。他们说，就照你说的行吧。
And I will fetch a morsel of bread, and comfort ye your hearts; after that ye shall pass on: for therefore are ye come to your servant. And they said, So do, as thou hast said.

18:6    亚伯拉罕急忙进帐棚见撒拉，说，你速速拿三细亚细面调和作饼。
And Abraham hastened into the tent unto Sarah, and said, Make ready quickly three measures of fine meal, knead it, and make cakes upon the hearth.

18:7    亚伯拉罕又跑到牛群里，牵了一只又嫩又好的牛犊来，交给仆人，仆人急忙预备好了。
And Abraham ran unto the herd, and fetcht a calf tender and good, and gave it unto a young man; and he hasted to dress it.

18:8    亚伯拉罕又取了奶油和奶，并预备好的牛犊来，摆在他们面前，自己在树下站在旁边，他们就吃了。
And he took butter, and milk, and the calf which he had dressed, and set it before them; and he stood by them under the tree, and they did eat.

18:9    他们问亚伯拉罕说，你妻子撒拉在哪里。他说，在帐棚里。
And they said unto him, Where is Sarah thy wife? And he said, Behold, in the tent.

18:10    三人中有一位说，到明年这时候，我必要回到你这里。你的妻子撒拉必生一个儿子。撒拉在那人后边的帐棚门口也听见了这话。
And he said, I will certainly return unto thee according to the time of life; and, lo, Sarah thy wife shall have a son. And Sarah heard it in the tent door, which was behind him.

18:11    亚伯拉罕和撒拉年纪老迈，撒拉的月经已断绝了。
Now Abraham and Sarah were old and well stricken in age; and it ceased to be with Sarah after the manner of women.



18:12    撒拉心里暗笑，说，我既已衰败，我主也老迈，岂能有这喜事呢。
Therefore Sarah laughed within herself, saying, After I am waxed old shall I have pleasure, my lord being old also?

18:13    耶和华对亚伯拉罕说，撒拉为什么暗笑，说，我既已年老，果真能生养吗。
And the LORD said unto Abraham, Wherefore did Sarah laugh, saying, Shall I of a surety bear a child, which am old?

18:14    耶和华岂有难成的事吗。到了日期，明年这时候，我必回到你这里，撒拉必生一个儿子。
Is any thing too hard for the LORD? At the time appointed I will return unto thee, according to the time of life, and Sarah shall have a son.

18:15    撒拉就害怕，不承认，说，我没有笑。那位说，不然，你实在笑了。
Then Sarah denied, saying, I laughed not; for she was afraid. And he said, Nay; but thou didst laugh.

18:16    三人就从那里起行，向所多玛观看，亚伯拉罕也与他们同行，要送他们一程。
And the men rose up from thence, and looked toward Sodom: and Abraham went with them to bring them on the way.

18:17    耶和华说，我所要作的事，岂可瞒着亚伯拉罕呢。
And the LORD said, Shall I hide from Abraham that thing which I do;

18:18    亚伯拉罕必要成为强大的国，地上的万国都必因他得福。
Seeing that Abraham shall surely become a great and mighty nation, and all the nations of the earth shall be blessed in him?

18:19    我眷顾他，为要叫他吩咐他的众子和他的眷属，遵守我的道，秉公行义，使我所应许亚伯拉罕的话都成就了。
For I know him, that he will command his children and his household after him, and they shall keep the way of the LORD, to do justice and judgment; that the LORD may bring upon Abraham that which he hath spoken of him.

18:20    耶和华说，所多玛和蛾摩拉的罪恶甚重，声闻于我。
And the LORD said, Because the cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is great, and because their sin is very grievous;

18:21    我现在要下去，察看他们所行的，果然尽像那达到我耳中的声音一样吗。若是不然，我也必知道。
I will go down now, and see whether they have done altogether according to the cry of it, which is come unto me; and if not, I will know.

18:22    二人转身离开那里，向所多玛去。但亚伯拉罕仍旧站在耶和华面前。
And the men turned their faces from thence, and went toward Sodom: but Abraham stood yet before the LORD.

18:23    亚伯拉罕近前来，说，无论善恶，你都要剿灭吗。
And Abraham drew near, and said, Wilt thou also destroy the righteous with the wicked?

18:24    假若那城里有五十个义人，你还剿灭那地方吗。不为城里这五十个义人饶恕其中的人吗。
Peradventure there be fifty righteous within the city: wilt thou also destroy and not spare the place for the fifty righteous that are therein?

18:25    将义人与恶人同杀，将义人与恶人一样看待，这断不是你所行的。审判全地的主，岂不行公义吗。
That be far from thee to do after this manner, to slay the righteous with the wicked: and that the righteous should be as the wicked, that be far from thee: Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right?

18:26    耶和华说，我若在所多玛城里见有五十个义人，我就为他们的缘故饶恕那地方的众人。
And the LORD said, If I find in Sodom fifty righteous within the city, then I will spare all the place for their sakes.

18:27    亚伯拉罕说，我虽然是灰尘，还敢对主说话。
And Abraham answered and said, Behold now, I have taken upon me to speak unto the LORD, which am but dust and ashes:

18:28    假若这五十个义人短了五个，你就因为短了五个毁灭全城吗。他说，我在那里若见有四十五个，也不毁灭那城。
Peradventure there shall lack five of the fifty righteous: wilt thou destroy all the city for lack of five? And he said, If I find there forty and five, I will not destroy it.

18:29    亚伯拉罕又对他说，假若在那里见有四十个怎吗样呢。他说，为这四十个的缘故，我也不作这事。
And he spake unto him yet again, and said, Peradventure there shall be forty found there. And he said, I will not do it for forty's sake.

18:30    亚伯拉罕说，求主不要动怒，容我说。假若在那里见有三十个怎吗样呢。他说，我在那里若见有三十个，我也不作这事。
And he said unto him, Oh let not the LORD be angry, and I will speak: Peradventure there shall thirty be found there. And he said, I will not do it, if I find thirty there.

18:31    亚伯拉罕说，我还敢对主说话，假若在那里见有二十个怎吗样呢。他说，为这二十个的缘故，我也不毁灭那城。
And he said, Behold now, I have taken upon me to speak unto the LORD: Peradventure there shall be twenty found there. And he said, I will not destroy it for twenty's sake.

18:32    亚伯拉罕说，求主不要动怒，我再说这一次，假若在那里见有十个呢。他说，为这十个的缘故，我也不毁灭那城。
And he said, Oh let not the LORD be angry, and I will speak yet but this once: Peradventure ten shall be found there. And he said, I will not destroy it for ten's sake.

18:33    耶和华与亚伯拉罕说完了话就走了。亚伯拉罕也回到自己的地方去了。
And the LORD went his way, as soon as he had left communing with Abraham: and Abraham returned unto his place.




旧约-- 创世记(Genesis) -- 第19 章( 本篇共有50 章)    　


19:1    那两个天使晚上到了所多玛。罗得正坐在所多玛城门口，看见他们，就起来迎接，脸伏于地下拜，
And there came two angels to Sodom at even; and Lot sat in the gate of Sodom: and Lot seeing them rose up to meet them; and he bowed himself with his face toward the ground;

19:2    说，我主阿，请你们到仆人家里洗洗脚，住一夜，清早起来再走。他们说，不，我们要在街上过夜。
And he said, Behold now, my lords, turn in, I pray you, into your servant's house, and tarry all night, and wash your feet, and ye shall rise up early, and go on your ways. And they said, Nay; but we will abide in the street all night.

19:3    罗得切切地请他们，他们这才进去，到他屋里。罗得为他们预备筵席，烤无酵饼，他们就吃了。
And he pressed upon them greatly; and they turned in unto him, and entered into his house; and he made them a feast, and did bake unleavened bread, and they did eat.

19:4    他们还没有躺下，所多玛城里各处的人，连老带少，都来围住那房子，
But before they lay down, the men of the city, even the men of Sodom, compassed the house round, both old and young, all the people from every quarter:

19:5    呼叫罗得说，今日晚上到你这里来的人在哪里呢。把他们带出来，任我们所为。
And they called unto Lot, and said unto him, Where are the men which came in to thee this night? bring them out unto us, that we may know them.

19:6    罗得出来，把门关上，到众人那里，
And Lot went out at the door unto them, and shut the door after him,

19:7    说，众弟兄，请你们不要作这恶事。
And said, I pray you, brethren, do not so wickedly.

19:8    我有两个女儿，还是处女，容我领出来，任凭你们的心愿而行。只是这两个人既然到我舍下，不要向他们作什么。
Behold now, I have two daughters which have not known man; let me, I pray you, bring them out unto you, and do ye to them as is good in your eyes: only unto these men do nothing; for therefore came they under the shadow of my roof.

19:9    众人说，退去吧。又说，这个人来寄居，还想要作官哪。现在我们要害你比害他们更甚。众人就向前拥挤罗得，要攻破房门。
And they said, Stand back. And they said again, This one fellow came in to sojourn, and he will needs be a judge: now will we deal worse with thee, than with them. And they pressed sore upon the man, even Lot, and came near to break the door.

19:10    只是那二人伸出手来，将罗得拉进屋去，把门关上，
But the men put forth their hand, and pulled Lot into the house to them, and shut to the door.

19:11    并且使门外的人，无论老少，眼都昏迷。他们摸来摸去，总寻不着房门。
And they smote the men that were at the door of the house with blindness, both small and great: so that they wearied themselves to find the door.

19:12    二人对罗得说，你这里还有什么人吗。无论是女婿是儿女，和这城中一切属你的人，你都要将他们从这地方带出去。
And the men said unto Lot, Hast thou here any besides? son in law, and thy sons, and thy daughters, and whatsoever thou hast in the city, bring them out of this place:

19:13    我们要毁灭这地方。因为城内罪恶的声音在耶和华面前甚大，耶和华差我们来，要毁灭这地方。
For we will destroy this place, because the cry of them is waxen great before the face of the LORD; and the LORD hath sent us to destroy it.

19:14    罗得就出去，告诉娶了（或作将要娶）他女儿的女婿们说，你们起来离开这地方，因为耶和华要毁灭这城。他女婿们却以为他说的是戏言。
And Lot went out, and spake unto his sons in law, which married his daughters, and said, Up, get you out of this place; for the LORD will destroy this city. But he seemed as one that mocked unto his sons in law.

19:15    天明了，天使催逼罗得说，起来，带着你的妻子和你在这里的两个女儿出去，免得你因这城里的罪恶同被剿灭。
And when the morning arose, then the angels hastened Lot, saying, Arise, take thy wife, and thy two daughters, which are here; lest thou be consumed in the iniquity of the city.

19:16    但罗得迟延不走。二人因为耶和华怜恤罗得，就拉着他的手和他妻子的手，并他两个女儿的手，把他们领出来，安置在城外。
And while he lingered, the men laid hold upon his hand, and upon the hand of his wife, and upon the hand of his two daughters; the LORD being merciful unto him: and they brought him forth, and set him without the city.

19:17    领他们出来以后，就说，逃命吧。不可回头看，也不可在平原站住。要往山上逃跑，免得你被剿灭。
And it came to pass, when they had brought them forth abroad, that he said, Escape for thy life; look not behind thee, neither stay thou in all the plain; escape to the mountain, lest thou be consumed.

19:18    罗得对他们说，我主阿，不要如此，
And Lot said unto them, Oh, not so, my LORD:

19:19    你仆人已经在你眼前蒙恩。你又向我显出莫大的慈爱，救我的性命。我不能逃到山上去，恐怕这灾祸临到我，我便死了。
Behold now, thy servant hath found grace in thy sight, and thou hast magnified thy mercy, which thou hast shewed unto me in saving my life; and I cannot escape to the mountain, lest some evil take me, and I die:

19:20    看哪，这座城又小又近，容易逃到，这不是一个小的吗。求你容我逃到那里，我的性命就得存活。
Behold now, this city is near to flee unto, and it is a little one: Oh, let me escape thither, (is it not a little one?) and my soul shall live.

19:21    天使对他说，这事我也应允你。我不倾覆你所说的这城。
And he said unto him, See, I have accepted thee concerning this thing also, that I will not overthrow this city, for the which thou hast spoken.

19:22    你要速速地逃到那城。因为你还没有到那里，我不能作什么。因此那城名叫琐珥（琐珥就是小的意思）。
Haste thee, escape thither; for I cannot do anything till thou be come thither. Therefore the name of the city was called Zoar.

19:23    罗得到了琐珥，日头已经出来了。
The sun was risen upon the earth when Lot entered into Zoar.

19:24    当时，耶和华将硫磺与火从天上耶和华那里降与所多玛和蛾摩拉，
Then the LORD rained upon Sodom and upon Gomorrah brimstone and fire from the LORD out of heaven;

19:25    把那些城和全平原，并城里所有的居民，连地上生长的，都毁灭了。
And he overthrew those cities, and all the plain, and all the inhabitants of the cities, and that which grew upon the ground.

19:26    罗得的妻子在后边回头一看，就变成了一根盐柱。
But his wife looked back from behind him, and she became a pillar of salt.

19:27    亚伯拉罕清早起来，到了他从前删在耶和华面前的地方，
And Abraham gat up early in the morning to the place where he stood before the LORD:

19:28    向所多玛和蛾摩拉与平原的全地观看，不料，那地方烟气上腾，如同烧窑一般。
And he looked toward Sodom and Gomorrah, and toward all the land of the plain, and beheld, and, lo, the smoke of the country went up as the smoke of a furnace.

19:29    当神毁灭平原诸城的时候，他记念亚伯拉罕，正在倾覆罗得所住之城的时候，就打发罗得从倾覆之中出来。
And it came to pass, when God destroyed the cities of the plain, that God remembered Abraham, and sent Lot out of the midst of the overthrow, when he overthrew the cities in the which Lot dwelt.

19:30    罗得因为怕住在琐珥，就同他两个女儿从琐珥上去，住在山里。他和两个女儿住在一个洞里。
And Lot went up out of Zoar, and dwelt in the mountain, and his two daughters with him; for he feared to dwell in Zoar: and he dwelt in a cave, he and his two daughters.

19:31    大女儿对小女儿说，我们的父亲老了，地上又无人按着世上的常规进到我们这里。
And the firstborn said unto the younger, Our father is old, and there is not a man in the earth to come in unto us after the manner of all the earth:

19:32    来，我们可以叫父亲喝酒，与他同寝。这样，我们好从他存留后裔。
Come, let us make our father drink wine, and we will lie with him, that we may preserve seed of our father.

19:33    于是，那夜她们叫父亲喝酒，大女儿就进去和她父亲同寝。她几时躺下，几时起来，父亲都不知道。
And they made their father drink wine that night: and the firstborn went in, and lay with her father; and he perceived not when she lay down, nor when she arose.

19:34    第二天，大女儿对小女儿说，我昨夜与父亲同寝。今夜我们再叫他喝酒，你可以进去与他同寝。这样，我们好从父亲存留后裔。
And it came to pass on the morrow, that the firstborn said unto the younger, Behold, I lay yesternight with my father: let us make him drink wine this night also; and go thou in, and lie with him, that we may preserve seed of our father.

19:35    于是，那夜她们又叫父亲喝酒，小女儿起来与她父亲同寝。她几时躺下，几时起来，父亲都不知道。
And they made their father drink wine that night also: and the younger arose, and lay with him; and he perceived not when she lay down, nor when she arose.

19:36    这样，罗得的两个女儿都从她父亲怀了孕。
Thus were both the daughters of Lot with child by their father.

19:37    大女儿生了儿子，给他起名叫摩押，就是现今摩押人的始祖。
And the first born bare a son, and called his name Moab: the same is the father of the Moabites unto this day.



19:38    小女儿也生了儿子，给他起名叫便亚米，就是现今亚扪人的始祖。
And the younger, she also bare a son, and called his name Benammi: the same is the father of the children of Ammon unto this day.




旧约-- 创世记(Genesis) -- 第20 章( 本篇共有50 章)    　


20:1    亚伯拉罕从那里向南地迁去，寄居在加低斯和书珥中间的基拉耳。
And Abraham journeyed from thence toward the south country, and dwelled between Kadesh and Shur, and sojourned in Gerar.

20:2    亚伯拉罕称他的妻撒拉为妹子，基拉耳王亚比米勒差人把撒拉取了去。
And Abraham said of Sarah his wife, She is my sister: and Abimelech king of Gerar sent, and took Sarah.

20:3    但夜间神来在梦中对亚比米勒说，你是个死人哪，因为你取了那女人来。她原是别人的妻子。
But God came to Abimelech in a dream by night, and said to him, Behold, thou art but a dead man, for the woman which thou hast taken; for she is a man's wife.

20:4    亚比米勒却还没有亲近撒拉。他说，主阿，连有义的国，你也要毁灭吗。
But Abimelech had not come near her: and he said, LORD, wilt thou slay also a righteous nation?

20:5    那人岂不是自己对我说，她是我的妹子吗。就是女人也自己说，他是我的哥哥。我作这事是心正手洁的。
Said he not unto me, She is my sister? and she, even she herself said, He is my brother: in the integrity of my heart and innocency of my hands have I done this.

20:6    神在梦中对他说，我知道你作这事是心中正直。我也拦阻了你，免得你得罪我，所以我不容你沾着她。
And God said unto him in a dream, Yea, I know that thou didst this in the integrity of thy heart; for I also withheld thee from sinning against me: therefore suffered I thee not to touch her.

20:7    现在你把这人的妻子归还他。因为他是先知，他要为你祷告，使你存活。你若不归还他，你当知道，你和你所有的人都必要死。
Now therefore restore the man his wife; for he is a prophet, and he shall pray for thee, and thou shalt live: and if thou restore her not, know thou that thou shalt surely die, thou, and all that are thine.

20:8    亚比米勒清早起来，召了众臣仆来，将这些事都说给他们听，他们都甚惧怕。
Therefore Abimelech rose early in the morning, and called all his servants, and told all these things in their ears: and the men were sore afraid.

20:9    亚比米勒召了亚伯拉罕来，对他说，你怎吗向我这样行呢。我在什么事上得罪了你，你竟使我和我国里的人陷在大罪里。你向我行不当行的事了。
Then Abimelech called Abraham, and said unto him, What hast thou done unto us? and what have I offended thee, that thou hast brought on me and on my kingdom a great sin? thou hast done deeds unto me that ought not to be done.

20:10    亚比米勒又对亚伯拉罕说，你见了什么才作这事呢。
And Abimelech said unto Abraham, What sawest thou, that thou hast done this thing?

20:11    亚伯拉罕说，我以为这地方的人总不惧怕神，必为我妻子的缘故杀我。
And Abraham said, Because I thought, Surely the fear of God is not in this place; and they will slay me for my wife's sake.

20:12    况且她也实在是我的妹子。她与我是同父异母，后来作了我的妻子。
And yet indeed she is my sister; she is the daughter of my father, but not the daughter of my mother; and she became my wife.

20:13    当神叫我离开父家，飘流在外的时候，我对她说，我们无论走到什么地方，你可
And it came to pass, when God caused me to wander from my father's house, that I said unto her, This is thy kindness which thou shalt shew unto me; at every place whither we shall come, say of me, He is my brother.

20:14    亚比米勒把牛，羊，仆婢赐给亚伯拉罕，又把他的妻子撒拉归还他。
And Abimelech took sheep, and oxen, and menservants, and womenservants, and gave them unto Abraham, and restored him Sarah his wife.

20:15    亚比米勒又说，看哪，我的地都在你面前，你可以随意居住。
And Abimelech said, Behold, my land is before thee: dwell where it pleaseth thee.

20:16    又对撒拉说，我给你哥哥一千银子，作为你在合家人面前哨羞的（羞原文作眼），你就在众人面前没有不是了。
And unto Sarah he said, Behold, I have given thy brother a thousand pieces of silver: behold, he is to thee a covering of the eyes, unto all that are with thee, and with all other: thus she was reproved.

20:17    亚伯拉罕祷告神，神就医好了亚比米勒和他的妻子，并他的众女仆，她们便跑生育
So Abraham prayed unto God: and God healed Abimelech, and his wife, and his maidservants; and they bare children.

20:18    因耶和华为亚伯拉罕的妻子撒拉的缘故，已经使亚比米勒家中的妇人不能生育。
For the LORD had fast closed up all the wombs of the house of Abimelech, because of Sarah Abraham's wife.




旧约-- 创世记(Genesis) -- 第21 章( 本篇共有50 章)    　


21:1    耶和华按着先前的话眷顾撒拉，便照他所说的给撒拉成就。
And the LORD visited Sarah as he had said, and the LORD did unto Sarah as he had spoken.

21:2    当亚伯拉罕年老的时候，撒拉怀了孕。到神所说的日期，就给亚伯拉罕生了一个儿子。
For Sarah conceived, and bare Abraham a son in his old age, at the set time of which God had spoken to him.

21:3    亚伯拉罕给撒拉所生的儿子起名叫以撒。
And Abraham called the name of his son that was born unto him, whom Sarah bare to him, Isaac.

21:4    以撒生下来第八日，亚伯拉罕照着神所吩咐的，给以撒行了割礼。
And Abraham circumcised his son Isaac being eight days old, as God had commanded him.

21:5    他儿子以撒生的时候，亚伯拉罕年一百岁。
And Abraham was an hundred years old, when his son Isaac was born unto him.

21:6    撒拉说，神使我喜笑，凡听见的必与我一同喜笑。
And Sarah said, God hath made me to laugh, so that all that hear will laugh with me.

21:7    又说，谁能预先对亚伯拉罕说撒拉要乳养婴孩呢，因为在他年老的时候，我给他生了一个儿子。
And she said, Who would have said unto Abraham, that Sarah should have given children suck? for I have born him a son in his old age.

21:8    孩子渐长，就断了奶。以撒断奶的日子，亚伯拉罕设摆丰盛的筵席。
And the child grew, and was weaned: and Abraham made a great feast the same day that Isaac was weaned.

21:9    当时，撒拉看见埃及人夏甲给亚伯拉罕所生的儿子戏笑，
And Sarah saw the son of Hagar the Egyptian, which she had born unto Abraham, mocking.

21:10    就对亚伯拉罕说，你把这使女和她儿子赶出去，因为这使女的儿子不可与我的儿子以撒一同承受产业。
Wherefore she said unto Abraham, Cast out this bondwoman and her son: for the son of this bondwoman shall not be heir with my son, even with Isaac.

21:11    亚伯拉罕因他儿子的缘故很忧愁。
And the thing was very grievous in Abraham's sight because of his son.

21:12    神对亚伯拉罕说，你不必为这童子和你的使女忧愁。凡撒拉对你说的话，你都该听从。因为从以撒生的，才要称为你的后裔。
And God said unto Abraham, Let it not be grievous in thy sight because of the lad, and because of thy bondwoman; in all that Sarah hath said unto thee, hearken unto her voice; for in Isaac shall thy seed be called.

21:13    至于使女的儿子，我也必使他的后裔成立一国，因为他是你所生的。
And also of the son of the bondwoman will I make a nation, because he is thy seed.

21:14    亚伯拉罕清早起来，拿饼和一皮袋水，给了夏甲，搭在她的肩上，又把孩子交给她打发她走。夏甲就走了，在别是巴的旷野走迷了路。
And Abraham rose up early in the morning, and took bread, and a bottle of water, and gave it unto Hagar, putting it on her shoulder, and the child, and sent her away: and she departed, and wandered in the wilderness of Beersheba.

21:15    皮袋的水用尽了，夏甲就把孩子撇在小树底下，
And the water was spent in the bottle, and she cast the child under one of the shrubs.

21:16    自己走开约有一箭之远，相对而坐，说，我不忍见孩子死，就相对而坐，放声大哭。
And she went, and sat her down over against him a good way off, as it were a bow shot: for she said, Let me not see the death of the child. And she sat over against him, and lift up her voice, and wept.

21:17    神听见童子的声音。神的使者从天上呼叫夏甲说，夏甲，你为何这样呢，不要害怕，神已经听见童子的声音了。
And God heard the voice of the lad; and the angel of God called to Hagar out of heaven, and said unto her, What aileth thee, Hagar? fear not; for God hath heard the voice of the lad where he is.

21:18    起来，把童子抱在怀中（怀原文作手），我必使他的后裔成为大国。
Arise, lift up the lad, and hold him in thine hand; for I will make him a great nation.

21:19    神使夏甲的眼睛明亮，她就看见一口水井，便去将皮袋盛满了水，给童子喝。
And God opened her eyes, and she saw a well of water; and she went, and filled the bottle with water, and gave the lad drink.

21:20    神保佑童子，他就渐长，住在旷野，成了弓箭手。
And God was with the lad; and he grew, and dwelt in the wilderness, and became an archer.

21:21    他住在巴兰的旷野。他母亲从埃及地给他娶了一个妻子。
And he dwelt in the wilderness of Paran: and his mother took him a wife out of the land of Egypt.

21:22    当那时候，亚比米勒同他军长非各对亚伯拉罕说，凡你所行的事都有神的保佑。
And it came to pass at that time, that Abimelech and Phichol the chief captain of his host spake unto Abraham, saying, God is with thee in all that thou doest:

21:23    我愿你如今在这里指着神对我起誓，不要欺负我与我的儿子，并我的子孙。我怎样厚待了你，你也要照样厚待我与你所寄居这地的民。
Now therefore swear unto me here by God that thou wilt not deal falsely with me, nor with my son, nor with my son's son: but according to the kindness that I have done unto thee, thou shalt do unto me, and to the land wherein thou hast sojourned.

21:24    亚伯拉罕说，我情愿起誓。
And Abraham said, I will swear.

21:25    从前，亚比米勒的仆人霸占了一口水井，亚伯拉罕为这事指责亚比米勒。
And Abraham reproved Abimelech because of a well of water, which Abimelech's servants had violently taken away.

21:26    亚比米勒说，谁作这事，我不知道，你也没有告诉我，今日我才听见了。
And Abimelech said, I wot not who hath done this thing: neither didst thou tell me, neither yet heard I of it, but to day.

21:27    亚伯拉罕把羊和牛给了亚比米勒，二人就彼此立约。
And Abraham took sheep and oxen, and gave them unto Abimelech; and both of them made a covenant.

21:28    亚伯拉罕把七只母羊羔另放在一处。
And Abraham set seven ewe lambs of the flock by themselves.

21:29    亚比米勒问亚伯拉罕说，你把这七只母羊羔另放在一处，是什么意思呢。
And Abimelech said unto Abraham, What mean these seven ewe lambs which thou hast set by themselves?

21:30    他说，你要从我手里受这七只母羊羔，作我挖这口井的证据。
And he said, For these seven ewe lambs shalt thou take of my hand, that they may be a witness unto me, that I have digged this well.

21:31    所以他给那地方起名叫别是巴（就是盟誓的井），因为他们二人在那里起了誓。
Wherefore he called that place Beersheba; because there they sware both of them.

21:32    他们在别是巴立了约，亚比米勒就同他军长非各起身回非利士地去了。
Thus they made a covenant at Beersheba: then Abimelech rose up, and Phichol the chief captain of his host, and they returned into the land of the Philistines.

21:33    亚伯拉罕在别是巴栽上一棵垂丝柳树，又在那里求告耶和华永生神的名。
And Abraham planted a grove in Beersheba, and called there on the name of the LORD, the everlasting God.

21:34    亚伯拉罕在非利士人的地寄居了多日。
And Abraham sojourned in the Philistines' land many days.




旧约-- 创世记(Genesis) -- 第22 章( 本篇共有50 章)    　


22:1    这些事以后，神要试验亚伯拉罕，就呼叫他说，亚伯拉罕，他说，我在这里。
And it came to pass after these things, that God did tempt Abraham, and said unto him, Abraham: and he said, Behold, here I am.

22:2    神说，你带着你的儿子，就是你独生的儿子，你所爱的以撒，往摩利亚地去，在我所要指示你的山上，把他献为燔祭。
And he said, Take now thy son, thine only son Isaac, whom thou lovest, and get thee into the land of Moriah; and offer him there for a burnt offering upon one of the mountains which I will tell thee of.

22:3    亚伯拉罕清早起来，备上驴，带着两个仆人和他儿子以撒，也劈好了燔祭的柴，就起身往神所指示他的地方去了。
And Abraham rose up early in the morning, and saddled his ass, and took two of his young men with him, and Isaac his son, and clave the wood for the burnt offering, and rose up, and went unto the place of which God had told him.

22:4    到了第三日，亚伯拉罕举目远远地看见那地方。
Then on the third day Abraham lifted up his eyes, and saw the place afar off.

22:5    亚伯拉罕对他的仆人说，你们和驴在此等候，我与童子往那里去拜一拜，就回到你们这里来。
And Abraham said unto his young men, Abide ye here with the ass; and I and the lad will go yonder and worship, and come again to you.

22:6    亚伯拉罕把燔祭的柴放在他儿子以撒身上，自己手里拿着火与刀。于是二人同行。
And Abraham took the wood of the burnt offering, and laid it upon Isaac his son; and he took the fire in his hand, and a knife; and they went both of them together.

22:7    以撒对他父亲亚伯拉罕说，父亲哪，亚伯拉罕说，我儿，我在这里。以撒说，请看，火与柴都有了，但燔祭的羊羔在哪里呢。
And Isaac spake unto Abraham his father, and said, My father: and he said, Here am I, my son. And he said, Behold the fire and the wood: but where is the lamb for a burnt offering?

22:8    亚伯拉罕说，我儿，神必自己预备作燔祭的羊羔。于是二人同行。
And Abraham said, My son, God will provide himself a lamb for a burnt offering: so they went both of them together.

22:9    他们到了神所指示的地方，亚伯拉罕在那里筑坛，把柴摆好，捆绑他的儿子以撒，放在坛的柴上。
And they came to the place which God had told him of; and Abraham built an altar there, and laid the wood in order, and bound Isaac his son, and laid him on the altar upon the wood.

22:10    亚伯拉罕就伸手拿刀，要杀他的儿子。
And Abraham stretched forth his hand, and took the knife to slay his son.

22:11    耶和华的使者从天上呼叫他说，亚伯拉罕，亚伯拉罕，他说，我在这里。
And the angel of the LORD called unto him out of heaven, and said, Abraham, Abraham: and he said, Here am I.

22:12    天使说，你不可在这童子身上下手。一点不可害他。现在我知道你是敬畏神的了。因为你没有将你的儿子，就是你独生的儿子，留下不给我。
And he said, Lay not thine hand upon the lad, neither do thou any thing unto him: for now I know that thou fearest God, seeing thou hast not withheld thy son, thine only son from me.

22:13    亚伯拉罕举目观看，不料，有一只公羊，两角扣在稠密的小树中，亚伯拉罕就取了那只公羊来，献为燔祭，代替他的儿子。
And Abraham lifted up his eyes, and looked, and behold behind him a ram caught in a thicket by his horns: and Abraham went and took the ram, and offered him up for a burnt offering in the stead of his son.

22:14    亚伯拉罕给那地方起名叫耶和华以勒（就是耶和华必预备），直到今日人还说，在耶和华的山上必有预备。
And Abraham called the name of that place Jehovahjireh: as it is said to this day, In the mount of the LORD it shall be seen.

22:15    耶和华的使者第二次从天上呼叫亚伯拉罕说，
And the angel of the LORD called unto Abraham out of heaven the second time,

22:16    耶和华说，你既行了这事，不留下你的儿子，就是你独生的儿子，我便指着自己起誓说，
And said, By myself have I sworn, saith the LORD, for because thou hast done this thing, and hast not withheld thy son, thine only son:

22:17    论福，我必赐大福给你。论子孙，我必叫你的子孙多起来，如同天上的星，海边的沙。你子孙必得着仇敌的城门，
That in blessing I will bless thee, and in multiplying I will multiply thy seed as the stars of the heaven, and as the sand which is upon the sea shore; and thy seed shall possess the gate of his enemies;

22:18    并且地上万国都必因你的后裔得福，因为你听从了我的话。
And in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed; because thou hast obeyed my voice.

22:19    于是亚伯拉罕回到他仆人那里，他们一同起身往别是巴去，亚伯拉罕就住在别是巴。
So Abraham returned unto his young men, and they rose up and went together to Beersheba; and Abraham dwelt at Beersheba.

22:20    这事以后，有人告诉亚伯拉罕说，密迦给你兄弟拿鹤生了几个儿子，
And it came to pass after these things, that it was told Abraham, saying, Behold, Milcah, she hath also born children unto thy brother Nahor;

22:21    长子是乌斯，他的兄弟是布斯和亚兰的父亲基母利，
Huz his firstborn, and Buz his brother, and Kemuel the father of Aram,

22:22    并基薛，哈琐，必达，益拉，彼土利（彼土利生利百加）。
And Chesed, and Hazo, and Pildash, and Jidlaph, and Bethuel.

22:23    这八个人都是密迦给亚伯拉罕的兄弟拿鹤生的。
And Bethuel begat Rebekah: these eight Milcah did bear to Nahor, Abraham's brother.

22:24    拿鹤的妾名叫流玛，生了提八，迦含，他辖，和玛迦。
And his concubine, whose name was Reumah, she bare also Tebah, and Gaham, and Thahash, and Maachah.




旧约-- 创世记(Genesis) -- 第23 章( 本篇共有50 章)    　


23:1    撒拉享寿一百二十七岁，这是撒拉一生的岁数。
And Sarah was an hundred and seven and twenty years old: these were the years of the life of Sarah.

23:2    撒拉死在迦南地的基列亚巴，就是希伯仑。亚伯拉罕为她哀恸哭号。
And Sarah died in Kirjatharba; the same is Hebron in the land of Canaan: and Abraham came to mourn for Sarah, and to weep for her.

23:3    后来亚伯拉罕从死人面前起来，对赫人说，
And Abraham stood up from before his dead, and spake unto the sons of Heth, saying,

23:4    我在你们中间是外人，是寄居的。求你们在这里给我一块地，我好埋葬我的死人，使她不在我眼前。
I am a stranger and a sojourner with you: give me a possession of a buryingplace with you, that I may bury my dead out of my sight.

23:5    赫人回答亚伯拉罕说，
And the children of Heth answered Abraham, saying unto him,

23:6    我主请听。你在我们中间是一位尊大的王子，只管在我们最好的坟地里埋葬你的死人。我们没有一人不容你在他的坟地里埋葬你的死人。
Hear us, my lord: thou art a mighty prince among us: in the choice of our sepulchres bury thy dead; none of us shall withhold from thee his sepulchre, but that thou mayest bury thy dead.

23:7    亚伯拉罕就起来，向那地的赫人下拜，
And Abraham stood up, and bowed himself to the people of the land, even to the children of Heth.

23:8    对他们说，你们若有意叫我埋葬我的死人，使她不在我眼前，就请听我的话，为我求琐辖的儿子以弗仑，
And he communed with them, saying, If it be your mind that I should bury my dead out of my sight; hear me, and intreat for me to Ephron the son of Zohar,

23:9    把田头上那麦比拉洞给我。他可以按着足价卖给我，作我在你们中间的坟地。
That he may give me the cave of Machpelah, which he hath, which is in the end of his field; for as much money as it is worth he shall give it me for a possession of a buryingplace amongst you.

23:10    当时以弗仑正坐在赫人中间。于是，赫人以弗仑在城门出入的赫人面前对亚伯拉罕说，
And Ephron dwelt among the children of Heth: and Ephron the Hittite answered Abraham in the audience of the children of Heth, even of all that went in at the gate of his city, saying,

23:11    不然，我主请听。我送给你这块田，连田间的洞也送给你，在我同族的人面前都给你，可以埋葬你的死人。
Nay, my lord, hear me: the field give I thee, and the cave that is therein, I give it thee; in the presence of the sons of my people give I it thee: bury thy dead.

23:12    亚伯拉罕就在那地的人民面前下拜，
And Abraham bowed down himself before the people of the land.

23:13    在他们面前对以弗仑说，你若应允，请听我的话。我要把田价给你，求你收下，我就在那里埋葬我的死人。
And he spake unto Ephron in the audience of the people of the land, saying, But if thou wilt give it, I pray thee, hear me: I will give thee money for the field; take it of me, and I will bury my dead there.

23:14    以弗仑回答亚伯拉罕说，
And Ephron answered Abraham, saying unto him,

23:15    我主请听。值四百舍客勒银子的一块田，在你我中间还算什么呢，只管埋葬你的死
My lord, hearken unto me: the land is worth four hundred shekels of silver; what is that betwixt me and thee? bury therefore thy dead.

23:16    亚伯拉罕听从了以弗仑，照着他在赫人面前所说的话，把买卖通用的银子平了四百舍客勒给以弗仑。
And Abraham hearkened unto Ephron; and Abraham weighed to Ephron the silver, which he had named in the audience of the sons of Heth, four hundred shekels of silver, current money with the merchant.

23:17    于是，麦比拉，幔利前，以弗仑的那块田和其中的洞，并田间四围的树木，
And the field of Ephron, which was in Machpelah, which was before Mamre, the field, and the cave which was therein, and all the trees that were in the field, that were in all the borders round about, were made sure

23:18    都定准归与亚伯拉罕，乃是他在赫人面前并城门出入的人面前买妥的。
Unto Abraham for a possession in the presence of the children of Heth, before all that went in at the gate of his city.

23:19    此后，亚伯拉罕把他妻子撒拉埋葬在迦南地幔利前的麦比拉田间的洞里。幔利就是希伯仑。
And after this, Abraham buried Sarah his wife in the cave of the field of Machpelah before Mamre: the same is Hebron in the land of Canaan.

23:20    从此，那块田和田间的洞就藉着赫人定准归与亚伯拉罕作坟地。
And the field, and the cave that is therein, were made sure unto Abraham for a possession of a buryingplace by the sons of Heth.




旧约-- 创世记(Genesis) -- 第24 章( 本篇共有50 章)    　


24:1    亚伯拉罕年纪老迈，向来在一切事上耶和华都赐福给他。
And Abraham was old, and well stricken in age: and the LORD had blessed Abraham in all things.

24:2    亚伯拉罕对管理他全业最老的仆人说，请你把手放在我大腿底下。
And Abraham said unto his eldest servant of his house, that ruled over all that he had, Put, I pray thee, thy hand under my thigh:

24:3    我要叫你指着耶和华天地的主起誓，不要为我儿子娶这迦南地中的女子为妻。
And I will make thee swear by the LORD, the God of heaven, and the God of the earth, that thou shalt not take a wife unto my son of the daughters of the Canaanites, among whom I dwell:

24:4    你要往我本地本族去，为我的儿子以撒娶一个妻子。
But thou shalt go unto my country, and to my kindred, and take a wife unto my son Isaac.

24:5    仆人对他说，倘若女子不肯跟我到这地方来，我必须将你的儿子带回你原出之地吗。
And the servant said unto him, Peradventure the woman will not be willing to follow me unto this land: must I needs bring thy son again unto the land from whence thou camest?

24:6    亚伯拉罕对他说，你要谨慎，不要带我的儿子回那里去。
And Abraham said unto him, Beware thou that thou bring not my son thither again.

24:7    耶和华天上的主曾带领我离开父家和本族的地，对我说话，向我起誓说，我要将这地赐给你的后裔。他必差遣使者在你面前，你就可以从那里为我儿子娶一个妻子。
The LORD God of heaven, which took me from my father's house, and from the land of my kindred, and which spake unto me, and that sware unto me, saying, Unto thy seed will I give this land; he shall send his angel before thee, and thou shalt take a wife unto my son from thence.

24:8    倘若女子不肯跟你来，我使你起的誓就与你无干了，只是不可带我的儿子回那里去。
And if the woman will not be willing to follow thee, then thou shalt be clear from this my oath: only bring not my son thither again.

24:9    仆人就把手放在他主人亚伯拉罕的大腿底下，为这事向他起誓。
And the servant put his hand under the thigh of Abraham his master, and sware to him concerning that matter.

24:10    那仆人从他主人的骆驼里取了十匹骆驼，并带些他主人各样的财物，起身往美索不达米亚去，到了拿鹤的城。
And the servant took ten camels of the camels of his master, and departed; for all the goods of his master were in his hand: and he arose, and went to Mesopotamia, unto the city of Nahor.

24:11    天将晚，众女子出来打水的时候，他便叫骆驼跪在城外的水井那里。
And he made his camels to kneel down without the city by a well of water at the time of the evening, even the time that women go out to draw water.

24:12    他说，耶和华我主人亚伯拉罕的神阿，求你施恩给我主人亚伯拉罕，使我今日遇见好机会。
And he said, O LORD God of my master Abraham, I pray thee, send me good speed this day, and shew kindness unto my master Abraham.

24:13    我现今站在井旁，城内居民的女子们正出来打水。
Behold, I stand here by the well of water; and the daughters of the men of the city come out to draw water:

24:14    我向哪一个女子说，请你拿下水瓶来，给我水喝，她若说，请喝，我也给你的骆驼喝，愿那女子就作你所预定给你仆人以撒的妻。这样，我便知道你施恩给我主人了。
And let it come to pass, that the damsel to whom I shall say, Let down thy pitcher, I pray thee, that I may drink; and she shall say, Drink, and I will give thy camels drink also: let the same be she that thou hast appointed for thy servant Isaac; and thereby shall I know that thou hast shewed kindness unto my master.

24:15    话还没有说完，不料，利百加肩头上扛着水瓶出来。利百加是彼土利所生的。彼土利是亚伯拉罕兄弟拿鹤妻子密迦的儿子。
And it came to pass, before he had done speaking, that, behold, Rebekah came out, who was born to Bethuel, son of Milcah, the wife of Nahor, Abraham's brother, with her pitcher upon her shoulder.

24:16    那女子容貌极其俊美，还是处女，也未曾有人亲近她。她下到井旁，打满了瓶，又上来。
And the damsel was very fair to look upon, a virgin, neither had any man known her: and she went down to the well, and filled her pitcher, and came up.

24:17    仆人跑上前去迎着她，说，求你将瓶里的水给我一点喝。
And the servant ran to meet her, and said, Let me, I pray thee, drink a little water of thy pitcher.

24:18    女子说，我主请喝，就急忙拿下瓶来，托在手上给他喝。
And she said, Drink, my lord: and she hasted, and let down her pitcher upon her hand, and gave him drink.

24:19    女子给他喝了，就说，我再为你的骆驼打水，叫骆驼也喝足。
And when she had done giving him drink, she said, I will draw water for thy camels also, until they have done drinking.

24:20    她就急忙把瓶里的水倒在槽里，又跑到井旁打水，就为所有的骆驼打上水来。
And she hasted, and emptied her pitcher into the trough, and ran again unto the well to draw water, and drew for all his camels.

24:21    那人定睛看她，一句话也不说，要晓得耶和华赐他通达的道路没有。
And the man wondering at her held his peace, to wit whether the LORD had made his journey prosperous or not.

24:22    骆驼喝足了，那人就拿一个金环，重半舍客勒，两个金镯，重十舍客勒，给了那女子，
And it came to pass, as the camels had done drinking, that the man took a golden earring of half a shekel weight, and two bracelets for her hands of ten shekels weight of gold;

24:23    说，请告诉我，你是谁的女儿，你父亲家里有我们住宿的地方没有。
And said, Whose daughter art thou? tell me, I pray thee: is there room in thy father's house for us to lodge in?

24:24    女子说，我是密迦与拿鹤之子彼土利的女儿。
And she said unto him, I am the daughter of Bethuel the son of Milcah, which she bare unto Nahor.

24:25    又说，我们家里足有粮草，也有住宿的地方。
She said moreover unto him, We have both straw and provender enough, and room to lodge in.

24:26    那人就低头向耶和华下拜，
And the man bowed down his head, and worshipped the LORD.

24:27    说，耶和华我主人亚伯拉罕的神是应当称颂的，因他不断地以慈爱诚实待我主人。至于我，耶和华在路上引领我，直走到我主人的兄弟家里。
And he said, Blessed be the LORD God of my master Abraham, who hath not left destitute my master of his mercy and his truth: I being in the way, the LORD led me to the house of my master's brethren.

24:28    女子跑回去，照着这些话告诉她母亲和她家里的人。
And the damsel ran, and told them of her mother's house these things.

24:29    *
And Rebekah had a brother, and his name was Laban: and Laban ran out unto the man, unto the well.

24:30    利百加有一个哥哥，名叫拉班，看见金环，又看见金镯在他妹子的手上，并听见他妹子利百加的话，说那人对我如此如此说。拉班就跑出来往井旁去，到那人跟前，见他仍站在骆驼旁边的井旁那里。
And it came to pass, when he saw the earring and bracelets upon his sister's hands, and when he heard the words of Rebekah his sister, saying, Thus spake the man unto me; that he came unto the man; and, behold, he stood by the camels at the well.

24:31    便对他说，你这蒙耶和华赐福的，请进来，为什么站在外边，我已经收拾了房屋，也为骆驼预备了地方。
And he said, Come in, thou blessed of the LORD; wherefore standest thou without? for I have prepared the house, and room for the camels.

24:32    那人就进了拉班的家。拉班卸了骆驼，用草料喂上，拿水给那人和跟随的人洗脚，
And the man came into the house: and he ungirded his camels, and gave straw and provender for the camels, and water to wash his feet, and the men's feet that were with him.

24:33    把饭摆在他面前，叫他吃，他却说，我不吃，等我说明白我的事情再吃。拉班说，请说。
And there was set meat before him to eat: but he said, I will not eat, until I have told mine errand. And he said, Speak on.

24:34    他说，我是亚伯拉罕的仆人。
And he said, I am Abraham's servant.

24:35    耶和华大大地赐福给我主人，使他昌大，又赐给他羊群，牛群，金银，仆婢，骆驼，和驴。
And the LORD hath blessed my master greatly; and he is become great: and he hath given him flocks, and herds, and silver, and gold, and menservants, and maidservants, and camels, and asses.

24:36    我主人的妻子撒拉年老的时候给我主人生了一个儿子。我主人也将一切所有的都给了这个儿子。
And Sarah my master's wife bare a son to my master when she was old: and unto him hath he given all that he hath.

24:37    我主人叫我起誓说，你不要为我儿子娶迦南地的女子为妻。
And my master made me swear, saying, Thou shalt not take a wife to my son of the daughters of the Canaanites, in whose land I dwell:

24:38    你要往我父家，我本族那里去，为我的儿子娶一个妻子。
But thou shalt go unto my father's house, and to my kindred, and take a wife unto my son.

24:39    我对我主人说，恐怕女子不肯跟我来。
And I said unto my master, Peradventure the woman will not follow me.

24:40    他就说，我所事奉的耶和华必要差遣他的使者与你同去，叫你的道路通达，你就得以在我父家，我本族那里，给我的儿子娶一个妻子。
And he said unto me, The LORD, before whom I walk, will send his angel with thee, and prosper thy way; and thou shalt take a wife for my son of my kindred, and of my father's house:

24:41    只要你到了我本族那里，我使你起的誓就与你无干。他们若不把女子交给你，我使你起的誓也与你无干。
Then shalt thou be clear from this my oath, when thou comest to my kindred; and if they give not thee one, thou shalt be clear from my oath.

24:42    我今日到了井旁，便说，耶和华我主人亚伯拉罕的神阿，愿你叫我所行的道路通达。
And I came this day unto the well, and said, O LORD God of my master Abraham, if now thou do prosper my way which I go:

24:43    我如今站在井旁，对哪一个出来打水的女子说，请你把你瓶里的水给我一点喝。
Behold, I stand by the well of water; and it shall come to pass, that when the virgin cometh forth to draw water, and I say to her, Give me, I pray thee, a little water of thy pitcher to drink;

24:44    她若说，你只管喝，我也为你的骆驼打水。愿那女子就作耶和华给我主人儿子所预定的妻。
And she say to me, Both drink thou, and I will also draw for thy camels: let the same be the woman whom the LORD hath appointed out for my master's son.

24:45    我心里的话还没有说完，利百加就出来，肩头上扛着水瓶，下到井旁打水。我便对她说，请你给我水喝。
And before I had done speaking in mine heart, behold, Rebekah came forth with her pitcher on her shoulder; and she went down unto the well, and drew water: and I said unto her, Let me drink, I pray thee.

24:46    她就急忙从肩头上拿下瓶来，说，请喝，我也给你的骆驼喝。我便喝了。她又给我的骆驼喝了。
And she made haste, and let down her pitcher from her shoulder, and said, Drink, and I will give thy camels drink also: so I drank, and she made the camels drink also.

24:47    我问她说，你是谁的女儿，她说，我是密迦与拿鹤之子彼土利的女儿。我就把环子戴在她鼻子上，把镯子戴在她两手上。
And I asked her, and said, Whose daughter art thou? And she said, The daughter of Bethuel, Nahor's son, whom Milcah bare unto him: and I put the earring upon her face, and the bracelets upon her hands.

24:48    随后我低头向耶和华下拜，称颂耶和华我主人亚伯拉罕的神。因为他引导我走合式的道路，使我得着我主人兄弟的孙女，给我主人的儿子为妻。
And I bowed down my head, and worshipped the LORD, and blessed the LORD God of my master Abraham, which had led me in the right way to take my master's brother's daughter unto his son.

24:49    现在你们若愿以慈爱诚实待我主人，就告诉我。若不然，也告诉我，使我可以或向左，或向右。
And now if ye will deal kindly and truly with my master, tell me: and if not, tell me; that I may turn to the right hand, or to the left.

24:50    拉班和彼土利回答说，这事乃出于耶和华，我们不能向你说好说歹。
Then Laban and Bethuel answered and said, The thing proceedeth from the LORD: we cannot speak unto thee bad or good.

24:51    看哪，利百加在你面前，可以将她带去，照着耶和华所说的，给你主人的儿子为妻。
Behold, Rebekah is before thee, take her, and go, and let her be thy master's son's wife, as the LORD hath spoken.

24:52    亚伯拉罕的仆人听见他们这话，就向耶和华俯伏在地。
And it came to pass, that, when Abraham's servant heard their words, he worshipped the LORD, bowing himself to the earth.

24:53    当下仆人拿出金器，银器，和衣服送给利百加，又将宝物送给她哥哥和她母亲。
And the servant brought forth jewels of silver, and jewels of gold, and raiment, and gave them to Rebekah: he gave also to her brother and to her mother precious things.

24:54    仆人和跟从他的人吃了喝了，住了一夜。早晨起来，仆人就说，请打发我回我主人那里去吧。
And they did eat and drink, he and the men that were with him, and tarried all night; and they rose up in the morning, and he said, Send me away unto my master.

24:55    利百加的哥哥和她母亲说，让女子同我们再住几天，至少十天，然后她可以去。
And her brother and her mother said, Let the damsel abide with us a few days, at the least ten; after that she shall go.

24:56    仆人说，耶和华既赐给我通达的道路，你们不要耽误我，请打发我走，回我主人那里去吧。
And he said unto them, Hinder me not, seeing the LORD hath prospered my way; send me away that I may go to my master.

24:57    他们说，我们把女子叫来问问她。
And they said, We will call the damsel, and enquire at her mouth.

24:58    就叫了利百加来，问她说，你和这人同去吗。利百加说，我去。
And they called Rebekah, and said unto her, Wilt thou go with this man? And she said, I will go.

24:59    于是他们打发妹子利百加和她的乳母，同亚伯拉罕的仆人，并跟从仆人的，都走了。
And they sent away Rebekah their sister, and her nurse, and Abraham's servant, and his men.

24:60    他们就给利百加祝福说，我们的妹子阿，愿你作千万人的母。愿你的后裔得着仇敌的城门。
And they blessed Rebekah, and said unto her, Thou art our sister, be thou the